Date: November  1, 2012
 
Title: What Happens in The Dark Knight
 
Spoilers, obviously.
 
As weve discussed, in Batman Begins 1960s-style full employment and antipoverty programs lead to skyrocketing crime while in The Dark Knight Rises 1980s-style tough-on-crime policies and neoliberal economics lead to a revolt of the economic underclass. The films are mirror images, one about the failure of liberal policies; the other about the failure of conservative policies. In this sense, The Dark Knight is truly the final film in this nihilistic trilogy, documenting the hopelessness of anything outside that usual left-right struggle.
 
From the start, the city is torn about how to handle the Batman, who has inspired a wave of second-rate imitators. Some believe its wrong to be idolizing a masked vigilante, but most (including the new DA, Harvey Dent) approve of his results.
 
Dent is doing his own part to lock up the criminals, working inside the system. Hes arrested all the mob bankers (except Lau) and is now going after the gangsters themselves, starting with mob boss Maroni (who took over for mob boss Falcone). But while the prosecutions bring him a great deal of political attention, they dont seem to achieve much in the way of concrete results  new gangsters spring up to take the place of whoever Dent arrests.
 
Dent decides the only way to win is to go big  really big. He arrests everyone at once, on charges that are unlikely to stick. Dent doesnt care that hes breaking the rules, as long as it solves the problem. He cites the Romans who suspended democracy to protect their city. (Although, as Rachel points out, they ended up losing democracy.) You either die a hero or you live long enough to see yourself become the villain, Dent explains. He hopes to take up Batmans mantle, but do it from inside the system.
 
But, as the mayor explains, Dent isnt just taking on his own sense of ethics, hes taking on the entire system: the mob, politicians, journalists, cops  anyone whose wallets about to get lighter. If he fails, both of their careers are over.
 
Just as Dent is frustrated with the justice system, the Joker is frustrated with the criminals. He tells them they need to go big: they need to kill the Batman. He offers to do it for a sizable sum of money, which the gangsters eventually agree to. The Joker is obsessed with the homo economicus of game theory (from whence his name?): when the gangsters ask why he needs the money to kill the Batman, he explains Like my mother used to tell me: if youre good at something, never do it for free.
 
The film opens with the Joker hiring five men to rob a mob bank: Dopey silences the alarm, Happy shoots him and drills through the vault, Grumpy shoots him and empties the cash into duffel bags, a bus runs him over, Bozo shoots the bus driver. Finally, Bozo pulls off his mask to reveal hes the Joker. This is a classic pirate game and, just as in the theory, the Joker gets to keep almost all the cash.
 
Batman eventually tries to track down the Joker by threatening the gangster Maroni. But its no use, as Maroni explains: No ones gonna tell you anythingtheyre wise to your actyou got rules. The Joker, hes got no rules. No ones gonna cross him for you. This is a straightforward application of game theorys Davies-Folk theorem: the rational thing is to seem irrational so your opponents cant count on you doing the rational thing.
 
Alfred sees this quickly, because it reminds him of a story from his own past:
 
I was in Burma. A long time ago. My friends and I were working for the local government. They were trying to buy the loyalty of tribal leaders, bribing them with precious stones. But their caravans were being raided in a forest north of Rangoon by a bandit. We were asked to take care of the problem, so we started looking for the stones. But after six months, we couldnt find anyone who had traded with him.  One day I found a child playing with a ruby as big as a tangerine.  The bandit had been throwing the stones away.  Some men just want to watch the world burn.
 
Note the parallels. In Alfreds story the entire status quo (including the local government and tribal leaders) is totally corrupt: the official plan is to bribe people. But the plan is defeated by someone even crazier, someone willing to steal the money but not interested in keeping it for himself.
 
Sure enough, when the Joker finally does get his hands on the money, he merely lights it on fire.
 
Meanwhile, Dents ethical compromises begin to grow and grow. When he kidnaps one of the Jokers thugs, he tries to threaten information out of him. This is something Batman does routinely, but Batman reminds Dent that Dent cant get away with that sort of thing  itd destroy his credibility as an insider.
 
In a climactic scene, the Batman finally confronts the Joker in the middle of the street. The Joker knows Batman lives by just one rule (I will not be an executioner) and encourages him to break it and kill him. But Batman cant bring himself to do it, he swerves at a key moment and ends up smashed while the Joker survives. (Yep: the Joker has just won the game of chicken.)
 
When he comes to, the Joker tells Batman that despite nominally working outside the system, hes actually just the systems pawn:
 
To them youre a freak like me. They just need you right now.  But as soon as they dont, theyll cast you out like a leper.  Their morals, their code its a bad joke. Dropped at the first sign of trouble. Theyre only as good as the world allows them to be. Youll seeIll show you
 
You have these rules. And you think theyll save you.  [But t]he only sensible way to live in this world is without rules.
 
Gordon arrests the Joker and takes him to the major crimes unit, only to find the Joker claiming Gordon does not actually control the unit  his people actually working for mob boss Maroni. Does it depress you, Lieutenant, to know how alone you are? he asks (a classic principal-agent problem).
 
The Joker has kidnapped both Dent and Rachel and set them both to blow so that Batman can only rescue one (opportunity cost). Batman goes to rescue Rachel but the Joker has switched their addresses and he actually ends up rescuing Dent1. Rachel dies and Dent loses half his face, becoming Two-Face.
 
Reese, one of Bruce Waynes employees goes on TV and threatens to reveal the identity of the Batman, but the Joker calls in and asks him to stop. I had a vision, he says. Of a world without Batman. The mob ground out a little profit and the police tried to shut them down, one block at a time and it was so boring. Ive had a change of heart. He threatens to blow up a hospital unless someone kills Reese. (He has thus constructed a trolley problem: people must decide whether its better to let the 100 die or kill the 1.)
 
At the hospital, the Joker explains things to Dent:
 
Do I really look like a guy with a plan, Harvey? I dont have a plan The mob has plans, the cops have plans.  Maroni has plans. Gordon has plans. Schemers trying to control their worlds. Im not a schemer, I show the schemers how pathetic their attempts to control things really are.
 
Its the schemers who put you where you are. You were a schemer. You had plans. Look where it got you.  Nobody panics when the expected people get killed. Nobody panics when things go according to plan, even if the plan is horrifying. If I tell the press that tomorrow a gangbanger will get shot, or a truckload of soldiers will be blown up, nobody panics. Because its all part of the plan. But when I say that one little old mayor will die, everybody loses their minds! Introduce a little anarchy, you upset the established order and everything becomes chaos. Im an agent of chaos. And you know the thing about chaos, Harvey?  Its fair.
 
This pushes Dent over the edge. He starts going after everyone responsible for killing Rachel: He starts with Weurtz, who kidnapped him. Weurtz gives up Maroni, who points to Ramirez, who helps him get Gordons family, who naturally gets Gordon.
 
Batman, meanwhile, is also crossing lines. In his attempt to find the Joker, he has turned every cell phone into a spy device. Even he admits this might be too much power for one man to have.
 
The Joker scares the city onto its two ferries. Once the ferries are in the middle of the water, he cuts their power and gives them both a button to blow up the other ferry, thereby constructing a prisoners dilemma (one boat is filled with real prisoners). The passengers discuss and vote. One of the prisoners makes a Ulysses pact and credibly commits by tossing the detonator overboard.
 
The Joker also took a busload of people from the hospital to the Prewitt Building where, through the window, you can see Jokers thugs with guns holding hospital people hostage. Gordon rushes in to get the thugs, but Batman discovers the thugs are hostages and the hostages are the thugs. (The Joker is illustrating The Market for Lemons: if the Joker is making it easy for you to kill his henchmen, why should you believe theyre actually his henchmen?)
 
(Batman saves the hostages (dressed as thugs) and stops the SWAT team and takes out the thugs (dressed as hostages). Neither of the boats decides to blow up the other and Batman prevents the Joker from triggering the failsafe.)
 
He then goes to rescue Gordon, who is trying to stop Dent from killing his family. Dent explains his new philosophy:
 
You thought we could be decent men in an indecent time. You thought we could lead by example. You thought the rules could be bent but not break2 you were wrong. The world is cruel. And the only morality in a cruel world is chance. Unbiased. Unprejudiced. Fair.
 
Throughout the film, weve seen various desperate attempts to change the system by ignoring the usual rules: Batman originally thought he could inspire change by being a cultural exemplar, but only ended up causing a bunch of kids to get themselves hurt by dressing up as him. Dent thought he could clean up the system by pushing righteously from the inside, but ended up cutting more and more ethical corners until his own personal obsessions ended up making him a monster. The Joker had by far the most interesting plan: he hoped to out-corrupt the corrupters, to take their place and give the city a better class of criminal.
 
And the crazy thing is that it works! At the end of the movie, the Joker is alive, the gangsters and their money launderers are mostly dead, and their money has been redistributed (albeit though the deflationary method of setting it on fire). And, as we see from the beginning of the third movie, this is a fairly stable equilibrium: with politicians no longer living in fear of the gangsters, theyre free to adopt tough anti-crime policies that keep them from rising again.3
 
The movie concludes by emphasizing that Batman must become the villain, but as usual it never stops to notice that the Joker is actually the hero. But even though his various games only have one innocent casualty, hes much too crazy to be a viable role model for Batman. His inspired chaos destroys the criminals, but it also terrorizes the population. Thanks to Batman, society doesnt devolve into a self-interested war of all-against-all, as he apparently expects it to, but that doesnt mean anyone enjoys the trials.
 
Thus Master Wayne is left without solutions. Out of options, its no wonder the series ends with his staged suicide.
 
Im actually not sure which game this is supposed to be. Its a bit like the poisoned goblets game in The Princess Bride, but I cant find a name for it in the literature.
 
These two sentences are in the shooting script but got cut from the film version: You thought we could lead by example. You thought the rules could be bent but not break
 
This also explains why the law-and-order crowd seems so miffed about succeeding  it wasnt actually their policies that succeeded.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  1, 2012
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: October  8, 2012
 
Title: How Looper Works
 
First off, go see Looper. One of the best movies Ive seen. Spoilers follow.
 
OK, lets start by explaining how a loopers career is supposed to look. You get hired as a looper, spend your time sitting in a corn field shooting people, eventually shoot yourself and get a big payday, live off of it for thirty more years, then get kidnapped and sent back in time and shot by yourself. Notice that this is a stable timeloop: young you grows old, goes back in time, gets shot by young you, who grows old, goes back in time, gets shot by young you, who grows old  etc.
 
But time travel doesnt eliminate free will. We see this with the case of Seth (Paul Dano / Frank Brennan). Instead of shooting Old Seth, Young Seth decides to let him escape. This too is a stable timeloop: young Seth grows old, goes back in time, escapes, lives in hiding while young Seth grows old, goes back in time, escapes, lives in hiding while  .
 
But other characters have free will too: young Joe (Joseph Gordon-Levitt) decides to give young Seth up. The gang cuts off one of young Seths fingers, pushing him into a new timeloop: young Seth gets caught, loses one of his fingers, goes back in time, escapes, while young Seth gets caught, loses one of his fingers, goes back in time, escapes, etc. With each new choice by the gang to let old Seth change young Seths future (and thus old Seths past), we head into a new timeloop, where old Seth has a different past (and thus different memories and different missing limbs).
 
In the first main timeloop (shown second in the movie, via a flashback), young Joe shoots old Joe, goes to China, becomes an unusually-talented agent of violence, finds true love, is kidnapped and sent back in time, and gets killed by young Joe, who goes on to do the same thing. This too is a nice stable timeloop.
 
But on one of these runs through the loop, old Joe manages to overpower the guards and, while he does go back in time, he manages to keep young Joe from killing him. He escapes into the field, finds the location of young Cid, then comes back to shoot Cids mother while Cid escapes into field and stows away on a train. Cid grows up to be the Rainmaker and Joe grows old. Cids henchmen murder old Joes wife but are overpowered by old Joe, who goes back in time to try again to kill Cid, who again escapes to become the Rainmaker and kill Joes wife. This too is a stable timeloop, although we see some of it only in speculative flash-forwards (Ill explain why in a moment).
 
Which timeloop are we watching? Well, were watching the story of a particular instance of Joe, who well call Movie Joe. Movie Joe only exists, however, because of a choice made by Flashback Joe (the Joe we see in the flashback that begins when Movie Joe is falling from his apartment). Flashback Joe is born, grows up, decides to give up Seth, closes his own loop, grows old, overpowers the henchmen, goes back in time, knocks out Movie Joe, hunts down Cid, and is about to kill Cids mother.
 
But Flashback Joe is not the protagonist of the film. The protagonist is Movie Joe. Movie Joe is born, grows up, decides to give up Seth, fails to close his loop, goes to protect Cid. Normally, young Joe fails and heads into a timeloop where Cid stows away on the train and becomes the Rainmaker. But Movie Joe somehow is able to foresee this future and concludes the only way to prevent it is to kill himself. Since he dies there, he never grows old and never goes back in time, leading to a timeline where Flashback Joe doesnt ever exist. Note, this is not a stable timeloop (because Movie Joe only kills himself to stop Flashback Joe, who cant exist if Movie Joe kills himself) but instead just a garden-variety timeline. In this timeline, presumably, Sarah keeps Cid from growing evil and everything ends happily ever after.
 
Next week well explain Primer.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October  8, 2012
 
I quite enjoyed Looper. Its Terminator meets Donnie Darko with a dash of Modern Problems! Despite plenty of tropes, it kept me guessing.
 
The instant(?)/synchronized(?) propagation of physical-disabilities to a future moment (without having affected, for example, intervening mobility) was the largest head-scratcher, but added enough gore/humor Ill forgive it.
 
I think we can surmise that Loopers specifically killing themselves (as opposed to any other Looper) is somehow meant to be helpful stabilizing things in the crime syndicates favor a sort of electrical circuit debouncing.
 
If we posit a first cycle where old Joe receives his fate when it come due, there is still the open question of what perturbs that seemingly-stable cycle. Why does he get away one particular time? Or why does he want to get away one time  is the Shanghai love only introduced on a subsequent cycle?
 
Maybe theres a particular moment hinted as being the divergence trigger? I may have to see this in the theater again something I havent done since Memento.
 
(BTW, on the off chance you havent seen Happy Accidents or Safety Not Guaranteed, I suspect theyd be right up your alley.)
 
posted by Gordon Mohr
 on October  8, 2012 #
 
Best explanation of the movie ive read. Thanks!
 
posted by Elise
 on October 11, 2012 #
 
But on one of these runs through the loop, old Joe manages to overpower the guards
 
But why? What destabilizes the loop?
 
Three more questions:
1) Why are the bad guys so afraid to kill young Seth after he fails to close the loop? It doesnt seem to be so bad when young Joe does it. (The film tries to inoculate itself against this argument by Jeff Danielss self-mockery of time travel logic, but the problem still holds.)
 
2) Wouldnt cutting off Seths fingers and disabling his legs do more than just change him memories? Wouldnt change his life sufficiently enough that he ultimately wouldnt be able to escape from Seth? Or not live 30 additional years at all? Couldnt cutting off a finger possibly make old Seth disappear as well?
 
3) What about the Rainmakers reign was so terrible? Old Joe mentions him closing a bunch of loops, which explained all the young loopers closing their loops all in a concentrated period, but the Rainmaker was only on the scene for the 6 months prior to Old Joes kidnapping. That means the Rainmaker was closing the loops 30 years hence, at the appropriate time. Wasnt that the deal? Id understand if he was closing loops early, but that wasnt the case. Was it just that he was closing loops meanly? (Killing spouses, etc.)
 
posted by crazymonk
 on October 21, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September 25, 2012
 
Title: Fix the machine, not the person
 
This post is part seven of the series Raw Nerve.
 
The General Motors plant in Fremont was a disaster. Everything was a fight, the head of the union admits. They spent more time on grievances and on things like that than they did on producing cars. They had strikes all the time. It was just chaos constantly.  It was considered the worst workforce in the automobile industry in the United States.
 
One of the expressions was, you can buy anything you want in the GM plant in Fremont, adds Jeffrey Liker, a professor who studied the plant. If you want sex, if you want drugs, if you want alcohol, its there. During breaks, during lunch time, if you want to gamble illegallyany illegal activity was available for the asking within that plant. Absenteeism was so bad that some mornings they didnt have enough employees to start the assembly line; they had to go across the street and drag people out of the bar.
 
When management tried to punish workers, workers tried to punish them right back: scratching cars, loosening parts in hard-to-reach places, filing union grievances, sometimes even building cars unsafely. It was war.
 
In 1982, GM finally closed the plant. But the very next year, when Toyota was planning to start its first plant in the US, it decided to partner with GM to reopen it, hiring back the same old disastrous workers into the very same jobs. And so began the most fascinating experiment in management history.
 
Toyota flew this rowdy crew to Japan, to see an entirely different way of working: The Toyota Way. At Toyota, labor and management considered themselves on the same team; when workers got stuck, managers didnt yell at them, but asked how they could help and solicited suggestions. It was a revelation. You had union workersgrizzled old folks that had worked on the plant floor for 30 years, and they were hugging their Japanese counterparts, just absolutely in tears, recalls their Toyota trainer. And it might sound flowery to say 25 years later, but they had had such a powerful emotional experience of learning a new way of working, a way that people could actually work together collaborativelyas a team.
 
Three months after they got back to the US and reopened the plant, everything had changed. Grievances and absenteeism fell away and workers started saying they actually enjoyed coming to work. The Fremont factory, once one of the worst in the US, had skyrocketed to become the best. The cars they made got near-perfect quality ratings. And the cost to make them had plummeted. It wasnt the workers who were the problem; it was the system.1
 
An organization is not just a pile of people, its also a set of structures. Its almost like a machine made of men and women. Think of an assembly line. If you just took a bunch of people and threw them in a warehouse with a bunch of car parts and a manual, itd probably be a disaster. Instead, a careful structure has been built: car parts roll down on a conveyor belt, each worker does one step of the process, everything is carefully designed and routinized. Order out of chaos.
 
And when the system isnt working, it doesnt make sense to just yell at the people in it  any more than youd try to fix a machine by yelling at the gears. True, sometimes you have the wrong gears and need to replace them, but more often youre just using them in the wrong way. When theres a problem, you shouldnt get angry with the gears  you should fix the machine.
 
If you have goals in life, youre probably going to need some sort of organization. Even if its an organization of just you, its still helpful to think of it as a kind of machine. You dont need to do every part of the process yourself  you just need to set up the machine so that the right outcomes happen.
 
For example, lets say you want to build a treehouse in the backyard. Youre great at sawing and hammering, but architecture is not your forte. You build and build, but the treehouses keep falling down. Sure, you can try to get better at architecture, develop a better design, but you can also step back, look at the machine as a whole, and decide to fire yourself as the architect. Instead, you find a friend who loves that sort of thing to design the treehouse for you and you stick to actually building it. After all, your goal was to build a treehouse whose design you like  does it really matter whether youre the one who actually designed it?2
 
Or lets say you really want to get in shape, but never remember to exercise. You can keep beating yourself up for your forgetfulness, or you can put a system in place. Maybe you have your roommate check to see that you exercise before you leave your house in the morning or you set a regular time to consistently go to the gym together. Life isnt a high school exam; you dont have to solve your problems on your own.
 
In 1967, Edward Jones and Victor Harris gathered a group of college students and asked them to judge another students exam (the student was a fictional character, but lets call him Jim). The exam always had one question, asking Jim to write an essay on Fidel Castro as if [he] were giving the opening statement in a debate. But what sort of essay Jim was supposed to write varied: some of them required Jim to write a defense of Castro, others required Jim to write a critique of Castro, the rest left the choice up to Jim. The kids in the experiment were asked to read Jims essay and then were asked whether they thought Jim himself was pro- or anti-Castro.
 
Jones and Harris werent expecting any shocking results here; their goal was just to show the obvious: that people would conclude Jim was pro-Castro when he voluntarily chose write to a pro-Castro essay, but not when he was forced to by the teacher. But what they found surprised them: even when the students could easily see the question required Jim to write a pro-Castro essay, they still rated Jim as significantly more pro-Castro. It seemed hard to believe. Perhaps some of the subjects were inattentive and did not clearly understand the context, they suspected.
 
So they tried again. This time they explained the essay was written for a debate tournament, where the student had been randomly assigned to either the for or against side of the debate. They wrote it in big letters on the blackboard, just to make this perfectly clear. But again they got the same results  even more clearly this time. They still couldnt believe it. Maybe, they figured, students thought Jims arguments were so compelling he must really believe them to be able to come up with them.
 
So they tried a third time  this time recording Jim on tape along with the experimenter giving him the arguments to use. Surely no one would think Jim came up with them on his own now. Again, the same striking results: students were persuaded Jim believed the arguments he said, even when they knew he had no choice in making them.3
 
This was an extreme case, but we make the same mistake all the time. We see a sloppily-parked car and we think what a terrible driver, not he must have been in a real hurry. Someone keeps bumping into you at a concert and you think what a jerk, not poor guy, people must keep bumping into him. A policeman beats up a protestor and we think what an awful person, not what terrible training. The mistake is so common that in 1977 Lee Ross decided to name it the fundamental attribution error: we attribute peoples behavior to their personality, not their situation.4
 
Our natural reaction when someone screws up is to get mad at them. This is what happened at the old GM plant: workers would make a mistake and management would yell and scream. If asked to explain the yelling, theyd probably say that since people dont like getting yelled at, itd teach them be more careful next time.
 
But this explanation doesnt really add up. Do you think the workers liked screwing up? Do you think they enjoyed making crappy cars? Well, we dont have to speculate: we know the very same workers, when given the chance to do good work, took pride in it and started actually enjoying their jobs.
 
Theyre just like you, when youre trying to exercise but failing. Would it have helped to have your friend just yell and scream at you for being such a lazy loser? Probably not  it probably would have just made you feel worse. What worked wasnt yelling, but changing the system around you so that it was easier to do what you already wanted to do.
 
The same is true for other people. Chances are, they dont want to annoy you, they dont like screwing up. So whats going to work isnt yelling at them, but figuring out how to change the situation. Sometimes that means changing how you behave. Sometimes that means bringing another person into the mix. And sometimes it just means simple stuff, like changing the way things are laid out or putting up reminders.
 
At the old GM plant, in Fremont, workers were constantly screwing things up: cars with engines put in backwards, cars without steering wheels or brakes. Some were so messed up they wouldnt start, and had to be towed off the line. Management would yell at the workers, but what could you do? Things were moving so fast. A car a minute dont seem like its moving that fast, noted one worker, but when you dont get it, youre in the hole. Theres nobody to pull you out at General Motors, so youre going to let something go.
 
At the Toyota plant, they didnt just let things go. There was a red cord running above the assembly line, known as an andon cord, and if you ever found yourself in the hole, all you had to do was pull it, and the whole line would stop. Management would come over and ask you how they could help, if there was a way they could fix the problem. And theyd actually listen  and do it!
 
You saw the results all over the factory: mats and cushions for the workers to kneel on; hanging shelves traveling along with the cars, carrying parts; special tools invented specifically to solve problems the workers had identified. Those little things added up to make a big difference.
 
When youre upset with someone, all you want to do is change the way theyre acting. But you cant control whats inside a persons head. Yelling at them isnt going to make them come around, its just going to make them more defiant, like the GM workers who keyed the cars they made.
 
No, you cant force other people to change. You can, however, change just about everything else. And usually, thats enough.
 
Email me about new posts:  Go(I wont use your email for anything else, promise.)
 
Or just follow me on Twitter here.
 
This story has been told several places, but the quotes here are from Frank Langfitt with Brian Reed, NUMMI, This American Life 403 (26 March 2010; visited 2012-09-23). Quotes are taken from the shows transcript which sometimes differ slightly from the aired version.
 
Some of the concepts and terms here were inspired by Ray Dalio, Principles (2001), part 2 (visited 2012-09-01).
 
Edward E. Jones and Victor A. Harris, The Attribution of Attitudes, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 3:1 (January 1967), 124.
 
Lee Ross, The Intuitive Psychologist and His Shortcomings: Distortions in the Attribution Process, Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 10 (1977), 173220.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 25, 2012
 
The mistake is so common that in 1977 Lee Ross decided to name it the fundamental attribution error: we attribute peoples behavior to their personality, not their situation.
 
Topically speaking - like attributing muslim rage to a personality, not a situation, perhaps.
 
posted by bradbell.tv
 on September 25, 2012 #
 
bradebll, I think that wold just be a plain old statistical error, where you generalize from a few raging people outwards to all 1.6 bn muslims. In the old days they would have probably called it racism, these days Newsweek and Fox News call it muslim rage.
 
posted by KO
 on September 25, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September 17, 2012
 
Title: Cherish mistakes
 
This post is part six of the series Raw Nerve.
 
This is a tale of two nonprofits.
 
At one, they hate making mistakes. How else could it be? Were not ever going to enjoy screwing up, they told me. But this attitude has a lot of consequences. Everything they do has to go through several layers of approval to make sure its not a mistake. And when someone does screw up, they try to hide it.
 
Its only natural  you know youre going to get in trouble for screwing up, so you try to fix it before anyone notices. And if you cant do, then your boss or your bosss boss tries. And if no one in the organization can fix it, and it goes all the way to the executive director, then he tries to figure out a way to keep it from the press or spin it appropriately, so the world never finds out they made a mistake.
 
At the other nonprofit, they have a very different attitude. You notice it the first time you visit their website. Right in their navigation bar, at the top of every page, is a link labeled Mistakes. Click it and youll find a list of all the things they screwed up, starting with the most horribly embarrassing one (they once promoted their group under false names).
 
And it goes on to discuss mistakes big and small, core and peripheral. They previously used flaky phones that would cut out during a call, annoying people. They were insufficiently skeptical in some of the most important claims they made. At times, their admissions have the tone of a chastised teenager forced to write an apology, but together they provide a remarkable record of all the mistakes, both crucial and mundane, you might reasonably make when starting something new.
 
Its not that this group likes making mistakes  you can feel the annoyance and embarrassment seeping through the page  but they dont shirk from them either. They identify their mistake, admit them publicly, and devise steps to avoid them next time. They use it as an opportunity to get better.
 
I wrote before about Carol Dwecks studies of successful and unsuccessful kids, but theres one bit that really jumped out at me. Given a really tough puzzle to solve, one growth mindset kid just smiles and says Mistakes are our friend.1
 
Mistakes are our friend. They can be an exasperating friend sometimes, the kind whose antics embarrass and annoy, but their heart is in the right place: they want to help. Its a bad idea to ignore our friends.
 
Thats a hard attitude to take toward mistakes  theyre so embarrassing, our natural instinct is to want to hide them and cover them up. But thats the wrong way to think about them. Theyre actually giving us a gift, because theyre pointing the way toward getting better.
 
If we try to ignore them, theyll keep nagging at us. Well run into them again and again in different guises. Youll say Dont be silly, that wasnt a mistake  I meant to do that. And then youll eagerly do the same thing next time (cognitive dissonance again). Or else youll say Yes, yes, of course that was a mistake  it wont happen again. But as you hurry to move on, you dont change anything, and so it does happen again.
 
The trick is to confront the mistake, fess up to what went wrong, and think about what you can change to keep it from happening again. Usually just promising not to do it again is not enough: you need to dig into the root causes and address those.
 
Sakichi Toyoda, the founder of the Toyota car company, developed a technique called Five Whys for handling this. For example, sometimes a car would come off the Toyota production line and not start. Why? Well, imagine it was because the alternator belt had come loose. Most car companies would stop here and just fix the alternator belt. But Toyoda understood that was dodging the mistake  it would just lead it to come back again and again. So he insisted they keep asking Why?.
 
Why was the alternator belt loose? Because it hadnt been put on correctly. Why? Because the person putting it on didnt double-check to see if it had fit in correctly. Why? Because he was in too much of a hurry. Why? Because he had to walk all the way to the other side of the line to get the belts and by the time he got back he didnt have enough time to double-check.
 
Aha! There, on the fifth why, we find the real cause of the mistake. And the solution is easy: move the box of alternator belts closer. But if wed stopped at any earlier point (say, by just yelling at the alternator belt guy to always remember to double-check), we wouldnt have actually fixed the problem. The same mistake would have happened again and again. Only by digging all the way to the root cause did we realize we needed to move the box of belts. The mistake pointed the way to the solution.
 
The last time I wrote about two nonprofits, someone commented to say they were outright nauseated by my post. [T]he website is not the place to signal humility and argue against your own conclusions. All that would demonstrate is naivety and incompetence, they insisted. And maybe theyre right: maybe having a mistakes page at the top of your website goes much too far.
 
Ive written before why I disagree, but even if theyre right that you shouldnt tell the world about your mistakes, you need to at least tell yourself. Its much too easy to conveniently forget about all the stuff you screwed up. And so even though it happens again and again, you never notice the pattern.
 
By forcing yourself to write it down, to keep a log of the problems youve run into, you begin to see patterns. You start seeing the things you get better at and the things you keep flubbing. And then you know what to work on for next time.
 
Next in this series: Fix the machine, not the person
 
Carol Dweck, Self-Theories: Their Role in Motivation, Personality, and Development (2000), 10.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 17, 2012
 
The thing that intrigued me, is the five Whys. When we are children, we all do this; child asks a question, adult answers. Child asks, Why? Adult answers, child keeps asking why.
 
posted by Ravi
 on September 17, 2012 #
 
I have an Aunt who once said to me that if you have no secrets, you have nothing to worry about and I am often accused of TMI but I talk about my mistakes and I find that people are comfortable talking to me about their mistakes. In that way I learn, and I  know myself. I can never be accused of lying to myself. Great post!!
 
posted by hetile 
 on September 17, 2012 #
 
Its hard to admit mistakes publicly because in many situations, it has been empirically verified that people are not forgiving of mistakes, and that lying or omission pays off. The psychologists and marketers have this all figured out. This is why presidents do not admit to making mistakes, corporations silently bury their errors rather than publicize them, doctors and hospitals remain silent about medical errors, etc. I think whether a mistake is tolerated and embraced depends greatly on the culture that already exists in a community.
 
That said, Im going to keep on mistakes and talking about them, if I believe I and others can benefit from them.
 
posted by Franklin Chen
 on September 17, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September  9, 2012
 
Title: Confront reality
 
This post is part five of the series Raw Nerve.
 
We are all capable of believing things which we know to be untrue, and then, when we are finally proved wrong, impudently twisting the facts so as to show that we were right. Intellectually, it is possible to carry on this process for an indefinite time: the only check on it is that sooner or later a false belief bumps up against solid reality, usually on a battlefield.
 
George Orwell, In Front of Your Nose
 
If you want to understand experts, you need to start by finding them. So the psychologists who wanted to understand expert performance began by testing alleged experts, to see how good they really were.
 
In some fields it was easy: in chess, for example, great players can reliably beat amateurs. But in other fields, it was much, much harder.
 
Take punditry. In his giant 20-year study of expert forecasting, Philip Tetlock found that someone who merely predicted everything will stay the same would be right more often than most professional pundits.1 Or take therapy. Numerous studies have found an hour with a random stranger is just as good as an hour with a professional therapist.2 In one study, for example, sessions with untrained university professors helped neurotic college students just as much as sessions with professional therapists.3 (This isnt to say that therapy isnt helpful  the same studies suggest it is  its just that whats helpful is talking over your problems for an hour, not anything about the therapist.)
 
As you might expect, pundits and therapists arent fans of these studies. The pundits try to weasel out of them. As Tetlock writes; The trick is to attach so many qualifiers to your vague predictions that you will be well positioned to explain pretty much whatever happens. China will fissure into regional fiefdoms, but only if the Chinese leadership fails to manage certain trade-offs deftly, and only if global economic growth stalls for a protracted period, and only if4 The therapists like to point to all the troubled people theyve helped with their sophisticated techniques (avoiding the question of whether someone unsophisticated could have helped even more). What neither group can do is point to clear evidence that what they do works.
 
Compare them to the chess grandmaster. If you try to tell the chess grandmaster that hes no better than a random college professor, he can easily play a professor and prove you wrong. Every time he plays, hes confronted with inarguable evidence of success or failure. But therapists can often feel like theyre helping  they just led their client to a breakthrough about their childhood  when theyre actually not making any difference.
 
Synthesizing hundreds of these studies, K. Anders Ericsson concluded that what distinguishes experts from non-experts is engaging in what he calls deliberate practice.5 Mere practice isnt enough  you can sit and make predictions all day without getting any better at it  it needs to be a kind of practice where you receive immediate informative feedback and knowledge of results.6
 
In chess, for example, you pretty quickly discover whether you made a smart move or a disastrous error, and its even more obvious in other sports (when practicing free-throws, its pretty obvious if the ball misses the net). As a result, chess players can try different tactics and learn which ones work and which dont. Our pundit is not so lucky. Predicting a wave of revolutions in the next twenty years can feel very exciting at the time, but it will be twenty years before you learn whether it was a good idea or not. Its hard to get much deliberate practice on that kind of time frame.
 
Ive noticed very ambitious people often fall into this sort of trap. Any old slob can predict what will happen tomorrow, they think, but I want to be truly great, so I will pick a much harder challenge: I will predict what will happen in a hundred years. It comes in lots of forms: instead of building another silly site like Instagram, I will build an artificial intelligence; instead of just doing another boring experiment, I will write a grand work of social theory.
 
But being great isnt as easy as just picking a hard goal  in fact, picking a really hard goal avoids reality almost as much as picking a really easy one. If you pick an easy goal, you know youll always succeed (because its so easy); if you pick a really hard one, you know youll never fail (because it will always be too early to tell). Artificial intelligence is a truly big problem  how can you possibly expect us to succeed in just a decade? But were making great progress, we swear.
 
The trick is to set yourself lots of small challenges along the way. If your startup is eventually going to make a million dollars, can it start by making ten? If your book is going to eventually persuade the world, can you start by persuading your friends? Instead of pushing all your tests for success way off to the indefinite future, see if you can pass a very small one right now.
 
And its important that you test for the right thing. If youre writing a program thats supposed to make peoples lives easier, whats important is not whether they like your mockups in focus groups; its whether you can make a prototype that actually improves their lives.
 
One of the biggest problems in writing self-help books is getting people to actually take your advice. Its not easy to tell a compelling story that changes the way people view their problems, but it turns out to be a lot easier than writing something that will actually persuade someone to get up off the couch and change the way they live their life. There are some things writing is really good at, but forcing people to get up and do something isnt one of them.
 
The irony, of course, is that the books are totally useless unless you take their advice. If you just keep reading them, thinking thats so insightful! that changes everything, but never actually doing anything different, then pretty quickly the feeling will wear off and youll start searching for another book to fill the void. Chris Macleod calls this epiphany addiction: Each time they feel like theyve stumbled on some life changing discovery, feel energized for a bit without going on to achieve any real world changes, and then return to their default of feeling lonely and unsatisfied with their life. They always end up back at the drawing board of trying to think their way out of their problem, and its not long before they come up with the latest pseudo earth shattering insight.7
 
Dont let that happen to you. Go out and test yourself today: pick a task just hard enough that you might fail, and try to succeed at it. Reality is painful  its so much easier to keep doing stuff you know youre good at or else to pick something so hard theres no point at which its obvious youre failing  but its impossible to get better without confronting it.
 
Next in this series: Cherish mistakes
 
Philip Tetlock, Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can We Know? (2006). I dont have my copy handy, so I checked this description against Philip Tetlock, Reading Tarot on K Street, The National Interest (September/October 2009), 5767.
 
Robyn M. Dawes, House of Cards: Psychology and Psychotherapy Built on Myth (1996).
 
Hans H. Strupp and Suzanne W. Hadley, Specific vs Nonspecific Factors in Psychotherapy: A Controlled Study of Outcome, Archives of General Psychology 36:10 (1979), 11251136.
 
Tetlock, Reading Tarot, 67.
 
K. Anders Ericsson, Ralf Th. Krampe, and Clemens Tesch-Rmer, The Role of Deliberate Practice in the Acquisition of Expert Performance, Psychological Review, 100:3 (July 1993), 363406.
 
Ericsson, Role, 367.
 
Chris Macleod, Epiphany Addiction, Succeed Socially (visited 2012-09-09).
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September  9, 2012
 
Great article! Thank you!
 
Its really amazing how closely your article resembles my experiences in the last few years. I recall myself going through cycles of setting totally unrealistic goals for myself, only to realize months later that I had just been spinning my wheels the whole time.
 
Very recently Ive been setting short-term, achievable goals and accomplishing them. This has helped to fuel my spirit to set more goals and achieve those too.
 
Your article reaffirms to me that I am on the right track.
 
Thanks again!
 
posted by Charles Hill
 on September 11, 2012 #
 
I enjoyed reading this post, you gotta be practical in life and not just digest the theoretical knowledge! Apply ur learnings. True! I have experienced whats called - epiphany addiction. And now I live by experimenting ideas about the changes i wish to make on my thinking pattern , since a thought results in action. So mend the thoughts. I feel better without those self help books. I dont rely on them anymore. Thanks Aaron for ur dose of inspiration!
 
posted by ritz
 on September 11, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September  1, 2012
 
Title: Lean into the pain
 
This post is part four of the series Raw Nerve.
 
When you first begin to exercise, its somewhat painful. Not wildly painful, like touching a hot stove, but enough that if your only goal was to avoid pain, you certainly would stop doing it. But if you keep exercising well, it just keeps getting more painful. When youre done, if youve really pushed yourself, you often feel exhausted and sore. And the next morning its even worse.
 
If that was all that happened, youd probably never do it. Its not that much fun being sore. Yet we do it anyway  because we know that, in the long run, the pain will make us stronger. Next time well be able to run harder and lift more before the pain starts.
 
And knowing this makes all the difference. Indeed, we come to see the pain as a sort of pleasure  it feels good to really push yourself, to fight through the pain and make yourself stronger. Feel the burn! Its fun to wake up sore the next morning, because you know thats just a sign that youre getting stronger.
 
Few people realize it, but psychological pain works the same way. Most people treat psychological pain like the hot stove  if starting to think about something scares them or stresses them out, they quickly stop thinking about it and change the subject.
 
The problem is that the topics that are most painful also tend to be the topics that are most important for us: theyre the projects we most want to do, the relationships we care most about, the decisions that have the biggest consequences for our future, the most dangerous risks that we run. Were scared of them because we know the stakes are so high. But if we never think about them, then we can never do anything about them.
 
Ray Dalio writes:
 
It is a fundamental law of nature that to evolve one has to push ones limits, which is painful, in order to gain strengthwhether its in the form of lifting weights, facing problems head-on, or in any other way. Nature gave us pain as a messaging device to tell us that we are approaching, or that we have exceeded, our limits in some way. At the same time, nature made the process of getting stronger require us to push our limits. Gaining strength is the adaptation process of the body and the mind to encountering ones limits, which is painful. In other words, both pain and strength typically result from encountering ones barriers. When we encounter pain, we are at an important juncture in our decision-making process.1
 
Yes its painful, but the trick is to make that mental shift. To realize that the pain isnt something awful to be postponed and avoided, but a signal that youre getting stronger  something to savor and enjoy. Its what makes you better.
 
Pretty soon, when you start noticing something that causes you psychic pain, youll get excited about it, not afraid. Ooh, another chance to get stronger. Youll seek out things youre scared of and intentionally confront them, because its an easy way to get the great rewards of self-improvement. Dalio suggests thinking of each one as a puzzle, inside of which is embedded a beautiful gem. If you fight through the pain to solve the puzzle, you unlock it and get to keep the gem.
 
The trick is: when you start feeling that psychological pain coming on, dont draw back from it and cower  lean into it. Lean into the pain.
 
In agile software development, theres a phrase: If it hurts, do it more often.2
 
For example, imagine Jane and Joan are working on a software project together. They both have a copy of the code; Jane is making the error messages friendlier while Joan is adding a new feature. They both work on their task for days and days until its finally done. Now they face a problem: they need to merge their different changes back together.
 
Maybe youve had this problem, either with code or with text documents: you send a draft of a report to two friends, both suggest different changes, and you have to merge all their changes back into the original document. Its incredibly annoying  and doing it with software is way worse. So people put it off. Jane thinks you know, let me just make the thank you messages a little nicer before we merge and Joan thinks you know, let me add just one more feature before we merge.
 
They keep putting the merge off, and every time they do the task gets bigger and more painful. But they have to do it eventually. By then, the merge is so big that it takes days of painstaking work just to piece together the already-written code. Its an arduous, painful process  which makes Joan and Jane just want to put it off even longer next time.
 
The agile approach, however, is to do the opposite: merging hurts, so well do it more often. Instead of merging every couple weeks, or every couple months, well merge every single day, or every couple hours. Even if Jane and Joan arent even close to finished with their work, theyll check in what they have so far (maybe with some special code deactivating it until its finished) so they dont end up in merge hell later on. These very small merges tend not to be painful at all, theyre so easy that you hardly even notice.
 
The same principle shows up all across software development: from testing to releasing, your natural inclination is to put off painful things, when doing them more often actually is much easier.
 
And I dont think its limited to software. I think the same principle would work even if, for some odd reason, you were required to touch a hot stove for an hour. Procrastinating and putting it off until you had no choice but to hold your hand to the stove for a full hour would end up being very painful. But if you did it in small frequent bits, just quick taps of the stove with your finger that eventually added up to an hour, it wouldnt be so bad at all. Again, the trick is not to run from the pain.
 
Of all the self-improvement tricks Ive learned, this one was by far the most surprising  and by far the most impactful. I spent most of my life hemmed in by my talents. I knew I had strengths and weaknesses and it just seemed obvious I should find jobs that fit my strengths. It seemed crazy to take a job that probed my weaknesses.
 
Sure, there were somethings, over there, that I wished I was better at, but they seemed so far away. Meanwhile, there were lots of things over here that I was good at. Why not just keep doing them? Sure, I realized intellectually that I could get better at the other stuff, but it hardly seemed worth the pain of trying.
 
Id learned not to shrink from hard truths, so Id literally have this conversation with myself: Yes, I know: if I got better at selling things to people [or whatever it was], Id be much better off. But look at how painful I find selling: just thinking about it makes me want to run and hide! Sure, itd be great if I could do it, but is it really worth all that pain?
 
Now I realize this is a bogus argument: its not that the pain is so bad that it makes me flee, its that the importance of the topic triggers a fight-or-flight reaction deep in my reptile brain. If instead of thinking of it as a scary subject to avoid, I think of it as an exciting opportunity to get better, then its no longer a cost-benefit tradeoff at all: both sides are a benefit  I get the benefits of being good at selling and the fun of getting better at something.
 
Do this enough times and your whole outlook on life begins to change. Its no longer a scary world, hemming you in, but an exciting one full of exciting adventures to pursue.3
 
Tackling something big like this is terrifying; its far too much to start with. Its always better to start small. Whats something youve been avoiding thinking about? It can be anything  a relationship difficulty, a problem at work, something on your todo list youve been avoiding. Call it to mind  despite the pain it brings  and just sort of let it sit there. Acknowledge that thinking about it is painful and feel good about yourself for being able to do it anyway. Feel it becoming less painful as you force yourself to keep thinking about it. See, youre getting stronger!
 
OK, take a break. But when youre ready, come back to it, and start thinking of concrete things you can do about it. See how its not as scary as you thought? See how good it feels to actually do something about it?
 
Next time you start feeling that feeling, that sense of pain from deep in your head that tells you to avoid a subject  ignore it. Lean into the pain instead. Youll be glad you did.
 
Next in this series: Confront reality
 
Ray Dalio, Principles (2001), part 2 (visited 2012-09-01). This whole section was inspired by his argument.
 
I first heard this phrase at a ThoughtWorks training. See also Martin Fowler, FrequencyReducesDifficulty, Bliki (28 July 2011).
 
See, for example, Derek Sivers, Push, push, push. Expanding your comfort zone, sivers.org (13 August 2012).
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September  1, 2012
 
I definitely get you on the kind of pain that you should run with, but there are also kinds of pain both physical and emotional that are a useful signal that actual damage is being done, and thats the kind to run away from.  Telling the difference is unfortunately difficult, and I think most people err on the side of running away before developing that discernment.
 
posted by liz
 on September  4, 2012 #
 
I think the analogy between pain from exercise leading to greater health, and pain from learning new things leading to you being more skilled and well rounded breaks down unless you get in to specificity.
 
The biggest hurdle I run in to when learning something new isnt the pain, but the amount of time that it takes to learn something new to enough mastery that it becomes worthwhile.  If I use my time to do something that I am good at, that is valuable time producing something.  I have to give up some of that time and spend (or ivest)it in learning, which is not immediately productive.
 
Its more like if you are good at running, and you can do well at races, but decide that you want to get better at swimming. Its really uncomfortable, painful, and if you compete you are in the back of the pack.  That is the most painful part.  You are going through more pain, for what feels like less of a payoff. And then youre slower at running
 
posted by Cameron
 on September  4, 2012 #
 
Quite true, its all about perception of reality.
 
Similar quote that stuck to me was Every day do one thing that scares you. It is really true that it makes you stronger.
 
Btw. I believe fear is an error of our adaptation. In current reality there are very few things we should be afraid of. If a car is about to hit you, then it is time to be afraid. But our day to day fears are just an error in our neural network. There is nothing to be afraid of if you live in a normal city nowadays (and dont go out drinking at night much hehehe).
 
I have been struggling with irrational fears (like being shy, or not taking chances etc) for many years and i think i cracked it . fear is an error.
 
Art
 
posted by Artur Ejsmont
 on September  4, 2012 #
 
The instant that you accept at a low level that a problem is happening, you can get a different handle on it (grounded in the understanding that you cant really make problems go away by ignoring them, you are just choosing a different, more painful way to experience them).
 
According to Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, the goal shouldnt really be to play through the pain.  The goal should be to acknowledge at some level you are already experiencing the pain, so may as well deal with it in a conscious way that allows you to handle the emotional experience of the problem and the problem itself separately.  I think youd find ACT interesting.
 
http://contextualpsychology.org/the_six_core_processes_of_act
 
posted by Casey
 on September  5, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 29, 2012
 
Title: What are the optimal biases to overcome?
 
This is a bonus post for my series Raw Nerve. It originally appeared in somewhat different form on Less Wrong.
 
Ive noticed that some people have complimented my series Raw Nerve by saying its a great explanation of cognitive biases. Which always amuses me, since the series grew out of frustrations I had with the usual way that term gets used. Theres a group of people (call them the cognitive bias community) who say the way to be more rational  to get better at making decisions that get you what you want  is to work at overcoming your biases. But if youre overcoming biases, surely there are some lessons that will help you more than others.
 
You might start with the most famous ones, which tend to be the ones popularized by Kahneman and Tversky. But K&T were academics. They werent trying to help people be more rational, they were trying to prove to other academics that people were irrational. The result is that they focused not on the most important biases, but the ones that were easiest to prove.
 
Take their famous anchoring experiment, in which they showed the spin of a roulette wheel affected peoples estimates about African countries. The idea wasnt that roulette wheels causing biased estimates was a huge social problem; it was that no academic could possibly argue that this behavior was somehow rational. They thereby scored a decisive blow for psychology against economists claiming were just rational maximizers.
 
Most academic work on irrationality has followed in K&Ts footsteps. And, in turn, much of the stuff done by the wider cognitive bias community has followed in the footsteps of this academic work. So its not hard to believe that cognitive bias types are good at avoiding these biases and thus do well on the psychology tests for them. (Indeed, many of the questions on these tests for rationality come straight from K&T experiments!)
 
But if you look at the average person and ask why they arent getting what they want, very rarely do you conclude their biggest problem is that theyre suffering from anchoring, framing effects, the planning fallacy, commitment bias, or any of the other stuff in these tests. Usually their biggest problems are far more quotidian and commonsensical, like procrastination and fear.
 
One of the things that struck me was watching Eliezer Yudkowsky, one of the most impressive writers on the topic of cognitive biases, try to start a new nonprofit. For years, the organization he founded struggled until recently, when Luke Muehlhauser was named executive director. Eliezer readily agrees that Luke has done more to achieve Eliezers own goals for the organization than Eliezer ever did.
 
But why? Why is Luke so much better at getting what Eliezer wants than Eliezer is? Its surely not because Luke is so much better at avoiding the standard cognitive biases! Luke often talks about how hes constantly learning new rationality techniques from Eliezer.
 
No, its because Luke did what seems like common sense: he bought a copy of Nonprofits for Dummies and did what it recommends. As Luke himself says, it wasnt lack of intelligence or resources or willpower that kept Eliezer from doing these things, it was a gap in general rationality.
 
So if youre interested in closing the gap, it seems like the skills to prioritize arent things like commitment effect and the sunk cost fallacy, but stuff like figure out what your goals really are, look at your situation objectively and list the biggest problems, when youre trying something new and risky, read the For Dummies book about it first, etc. Thats the stuff Im interested in writing about.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 29, 2012
 
Maybe some things that are clearly biases, when studied in isolated/reductionist experiments, are even rational.
 
Say theres a simple folk rule of thumb thats right 90% of the time, but results in a wrong/biased response 10% of the time. However, the cost of being wrong is small, and the marginal benefit of the sensors/rules/neurons/etc for distinguishing that 10% is less than devoting that same decisionmaking-machinery to some other purpose.
 
So there are errors/biases everywhere but theyre roughly the right errors/biases given the complexity-budget and circumstances (childhood/evolution/founding-constraints) under which they arose. Or at least, close enough to the right errors that theyre only well-teased out in modern, rapid-cultural-change, laboratory-study conditions. The bias is locally irrational, but globally as efficient as any other strategy implementable within the same constaints.
 
Outside laboratory-like conditions, can we reliably tell the difference between bias and tacit knowledge? And conversely, wont some imperfect/overconfident laboratory conditions miscategorize tacit knowledge or globally efficient reasoning given a firm cognitive budget as bias?
 
posted by Gordon Mohr
 on August 29, 2012 #
 
Your third article in the Raw Nerve series highlight the benefits of fighting confirmation bias (we tend to look for evidence to confirm we don;t need to change) and the fundamental attribution error (when we fail it is situational, when others fail it is a flaw in their character), although you do not name these specifically.
 
posted by 
 on September  2, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 18, 2012
 
Title: Look at yourself objectively
 
This post is part three of the series Raw Nerve.
 
In the 1840s, hospitals were dangerous places. Mothers who went in to give birth often didnt make it out. For example, at Vienna General Hospitals First Obstetrical Clinic, as many as 10% of mothers died of puerperal fever after giving birth. But there was some good news: at the Second Clinic, the number was just 4%. Expectant mothers noticed this  some would get down on their knees and beg to be admitted to the Second Clinic. Others, hearing new patients were being admitted to the First Clinic that day, decided theyd rather give birth in the streets.
 
Ignaz Semmelweis, an assistant at the First Clinic, couldnt bear it. He began desperately searching for some kind of explanation for the difference. He tested many things without success. Then, in 1847, Semmelweiss friend Jakob Kolletschka was performing an autopsy when a student accidentally poked him with a scalpel. It was a minor injury, but Kolletschka got terribly sick and ultimately passed away, with symptoms rather like the what the mothers had. Which got Semmelweis wondering: was some deathly material on the corpses responsible for the deaths?
 
To test this, he insisted the doctors begin washing their hands with chlorinated lime (which he found best removed the stink of death) before handling the pregnant women. The results were shocking. In April 1847, the mortality rate was 18.3%. Semmelweis instituted handwashing in mid-May and by June the mortality rate had crashed to 2.2%. The next month it was even less and later that year it reached zero  for the first time ever.
 
Youd think doctors would be thrilled by this incredible discovery. Instead, Semmelweis was ridiculed and attacked. He was fired from the hospital and forced out of Vienna. In published medical works my teachings are either ignored or attacked, he complained. The medical faculty at Wrzburg awarded a prize to a monograph written in 1859 in which my teachings were rejected. Even in his native Vienna, hundreds of mothers continued to die every year.
 
Semmelweis turned to alcohol and his behavior became increasingly erratic. In 1865, he was committed to a mental institution. There he was beaten by the guards, placed in a straitjacket, and locked in a dark cell. He died shortly thereafter, at the age of 47, from an infected wound.1
 
Why did doctors so stubbornly reject Ignaz Semmelweis? Well, imagine being told you were responsible for the deaths of thousands of your patients. That you had been killing the people you were supposed to be protecting. That you were so bad at your job that you were actually worse than just giving birth in the street.
 
We all know people dont like to hear bad news about themselves. Indeed, we go out of our way to avoid it  and when we do confront it, we try to downplay it or explain it away. Cognitive dissonance psychologists have proven it in dozens of experiments: Force students through an embarrassing initiation to take a class, and theyll insist the class is much more interesting. Make them do a favor for someone they hate, and they start insisting they actually like them. Have them make a small ethical compromises and theyll feel comfortable making bigger and bigger ones. Instead of just accepting we made a mistake, and shouldnt have compromised or done the favor or join the class, we start telling ourselves that compromising isnt so bad  and when the next compromise comes along, we believe the lies we tell ourselves, and leap at making another mistake. We hate hearing bad news about ourselves so much that wed rather change our behavior than just admit we screwed up.2
 
It doesnt help much when our friends point out what we did wrong. If were so scared of hearing from ourselves that we made a mistake, just imagine how much we hate hearing it from someone else. And our friends know this: the answer to Does this outfit make me look fat? is not supposed to be yes. We may joke about our friends foibles behind their back, but we rarely do so to their face. Even at work, a lot of effort goes into making sure employees are insulated from their superiors most negative assessments. This is what were taught: make five compliments for every criticism, sandwich negative feedback with positive feedback on each side, the most important thing is to keep up someones self-esteem.
 
But, as Semmelweis showed, this is a dangerous habit. Sure, its awful to hear youre killing peoplebut its way worse to keep on killing people! It may not be fun to get told youre lazy, but its better to hear it now than to find out when youre fired. If you want to work on getting better, you need to start by knowing where you are.
 
Semmelweis was defeated about as much as a man can be defeated. But nothing the other doctors could do to him would change the facts. Eventually scientists proved the germ theory of disease and Semmelweis was vindicated. Today, hes an international hero: universities and hospitals are named after him, his house has been turned into a museum, Austria even put his face on a 50 gold coin. Meanwhile, the doctors who opposed him are now seen as close-minded killers.
 
Try as you might, you cant beat reality. Semmelweis was right: those doctors were killing people. Firing him, driving him out of the country, writing long books disproving all his claims  none of it could change that frightening fact. The doctors may have thought they were winning the argument at the time, but they were big losers in the long run. And so were all the families that lost a loved one because they refused to admit their mistake.
 
But imagine if they had. When youre being attacked, conceding you screwed up seems like the worst thing you can do. If even you wont stand up for yourself, how can anyone else believe in you? Admitting your mistakes seems like giving up; it just proves that your opponents were right all along. But is it really so bad?
 
When Oprah started defending fabulist James Frey, she was savaged by the press. So she invited her critics on the show and apologized, saying You were right, I was wrong. It didnt destroy her reputation; it rescued it. When the space shuttle Columbia exploded, launch manager Wayne Hale took full responsibility: The bottom line is that I failed to understand what I was being toldI am guilty of allowing Columbia to crash. He was promoted. When JFK admitted the responsibility for the Bay of Pigs fiasco was mine, and mine alone, his poll numbers soared.3
 
Imagine the same thing in your own life. If your boss started taking responsibility for your organizations problems instead of blaming others, wouldnt you like him more? If your doctor told you honestly that she had screwed up a procedure, instead of trying to cover up the mistake, wouldnt you prefer that? If a politician came clean that their policy proposals had failed, wouldnt you be more likely to trust him?
 
In moments of great emotional stress, we revert to our worst habits: we dig in and fight harder. The real trick is not to get better at fighting  its to get better at stopping ourselves: at taking a deep breath, calming down, and letting our better natures take over from our worst instincts.
 
Even if seeing ourselves objectively is the best option, all our natural instincts all point the other direction. Not only do we try hard to avoid bad news about ourselves, we tend to exaggerate the good news. Imagine you and Jane are both up for a promotion. You want it bad, so you stay late, you work weekends. Sure, some things still slip through the cracks  but even those mistakes have really good reasons! Jane never does anything like that.
 
But if she did  would you even know? We see the world from our own perspective. When we have to cancel hanging out with friends to do extra work, we always see that  and feel the sacrifice. But when Jane does it, we see and feel nothing. You only get to see your own perspective. And even our mistakes make sense from our perspective  we see all of the context, everything that led up to it. It all makes sense because we saw it happen. When we screw up, its for a reason. When other people screw up, its because theyre screwups. FAE@@
 
Looking at ourselves objectively isnt easy. But its essential if we ever want to get better. And if we dont do it, we leave ourselves open to con artists and ethical compromisers who prey on our desire to believe were perfect. Theres no one solution, but here are some tricks I use to get a more accurate sense of myself:
 
Embrace your failings. Be willing to believe the worst about yourself. Remember: its much better to accept that youre a selfish, racist moron and try to improve, than to continue sleepwalking through life that way as the only one who doesnt know it.
 
Studiously avoid euphemism. People try and sugarcoat the tough facts about themselves by putting them in the best light possible. They say Well, I was going to get to it, but then there was that big news story today and not Yeah, I was procrastinating on it and started reading the news instead. Stating things plainly makes it easier to confront the truth.
 
Reverse your projections. Every time you see yourself complaining about other groups or other people, stop yourself and think: is it possible, is there any way, that someone out there might be making the same complaints about me?
 
Look up, not down. Its always easy to make yourself look good by finding people even worse than you. Yes, we agree, youre not the worst person in the world. Thats not the question. The question is whether you can get better  and to do that you need to look at the people who are even better than you.
 
Criticize yourself. The main reason people dont tell you what they really think of you is theyre afraid of your reaction. (If theyre right to be afraid, then you need to start by working on that.) But people will feel more comfortable telling you the truth if you start by criticizing yourself, showing them that its OK.
 
Find honest friends. There are some people who are just congenitally honest. For others, its possible to build a relationship of honesty over time. Either way, its important to find friends who you can trust to tell to tell you the harsh truths about yourself. This is really hard  most people dont like telling harsh truths. Some people have had success providing an anonymous feedback form for people to submit their candid reactions.
 
Listen to the criticism. Since its so rare to find friends who will honestly criticize you, you need to listen extra-carefully when they do. Its tempting to check what they say against your other friends. For example, if one friend says the short story you wrote isnt very good, you might show it to some other friends and ask them what they think. Wow, they all think its great! Guess that one friend was just an outlier. But the fact is that most of your friends are going to say its great because theyre your friend; by just taking their word for it, you end up ignoring the one person whos actually being honest with you.
 
Take the outside view. As I said before, were always locked in our own heads, where everything we do makes sense. So try seeing what you look like from the outside for a bit, assuming you dont know any of those details. Sure, your big money-making plan sounds like a great idea when you explain it, but if you throw that away, is there any external evidence that it will work?
 
Next in this series: Lean into the pain
 
Ignaz Semmelweis, Wikipedia (visited 2012-08-13).
 
Carol Tavris and Elliot Aaronson, Mistakes Were Made (but not by me): Why We Justify Foolish Beliefs, Bad Decisions, and Hurtful Acts, (2007), ch. 1.
 
Mistakes Were Made, ch. 8. A larger study of public companies also found that companies which admitted screwing up tended to have higher stock prices. Fiona Lee, Christopher Peterson, and Larissa Z. Tiedens, Mea Culpa: Predicting Stock Prices From Organizational Attributions, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30: 12 (December 2004), 16361649.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 18, 2012
 
Insightful article.
 
Ive found that in sports and other physical activity, I am uneasy about seeing my own performance on video. I have a self-image, which is far away from the reality and just seeing myself makes me feel awkward, even if I dont show the video to anyone else.
 
At the same time, I realize that seeing oneself is the easiest way to get in touch with reality and to perhaps improve ones technique. I do believe that the change has to become with out too much conscious interference (Im influenced by Gallweys philosophy here), but to see myself on video, makes it much easier to visually compare my real performance with what I want it to be.
 
posted by Jarno Virtanen
 on August 28, 2012 #
 
Thanks, great article. Heres a bitcookie #8635
 
posted by Boris
 on August 28, 2012 #
 
Thanks for bitcookie #8635-ms
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 28, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 22, 2012
 
Title: What Happens in Batman Begins
 
Warning: Naturally, spoilers follow  for both Batman Begins and The Dark Knight Rises.1
 
We begin in the 1980s, when the global forces of evil have decided to institute a new economic policy on the world. Their nefarious plan dramatically exacerbates inequality, making the rich filthy rich while the poor suffer terrible levels of unemployment.
 
The difference is that in the Batman universe, Gothams leading billionaire (Thomas Wayne) cant stand the suffering and begins investing in the city when the government wont. He builds a giant Keynesian supertrain in a desperate attempt to get the city back to work. But, in an ironic twist, he ends up murdered by one of the desperate poverty-stricken citizens hes trying so hard to help.
 
The murder of the billionaire shocks the surviving billionaires, leading them to reverse their neoliberal policies. Instead of getting tough on crime, they decide to indulge criminals, with a deep willingness to treat criminality as merely a mental health problem.
 
As the billionaires retreat from power, organized crime steps in, taking their place in buying off judges and unions and cops. Instead of being run by Wayne Enterprises, the city ends up being run by mob boss Carmine Falcone.
 
But a few rogue elements in the police and DAs office refuse to be bought off. They free the man who murdered Thomas Wayne in exchange for his testimony against Falcone. Bruce Wayne, the billionaires son, is so haunted by his personal demons that he cant stand this trade-off. When his childhood-friend-turned-rogue-ADA points out the selfishness of his position, he confronts Falcone. When Falcone explains that Bruce will always live in fear of what he does not understand, Bruce sets off on a quest to understand criminals.
 
His search concludes in a far eastern terrorist training camp, which turns out to be backed by the same global forces of evil that invented neoliberalism. Its the year 2000 and they have a new plan: attacking Gotham with the hope of inspiring enough fear that the city will destroy itself.2
 
Bruce, still haunted by the execution of his parents, refuses to become an executioner himself and, instead of joining the plot, sets fire to the camp before returning to clean up Gotham his own way. He begins by putting together a case against Falcone and re-seizing control of Wayne Enterprises by buying up its shares on the public market.
 
In doing so, he begins a reversal of history that eventually culminates in The Dark Knight Rises. His attack on Falcone leads to a new era of tough-on-crime, which dethrones the organized criminals and allows the wealthy to seize power again. The wealthy quickly reinstitute neoliberalism and buy back Bruces shares on the public market, putting Wayne Enterprises back in their hands. But the global forces of evil step in once again to restore balance by letting Bane to release the organized criminals.3 Bruce Wayne goes back to being an innocent child of privilege and the trilogy  ends exactly where it started.4
 
Batman Begins is very clearly the mirror image of The Dark Knight Rises (some scenes are almost word-for-word the same), so understanding one can help us understand the other.
 
Yes, in this trilogy 9/11 really was an inside job, from the same folks who brought you Reaganomics.
 
Democrats, Republicans, organized crime, or billionaire financiers  whoever tries to seize power, the global forces of evil continue to hold the reins from behind-the-scenes, making sure nobody changes the system too much.
 
Exactly, right down to how Robin (who see as a small boy in the first film, the same way we see Bruce in flashbacks) ends the film frustrated by the system (the same way Bruce was frustrated by Rachel) and is about to head out in a quest of his own, following the same path Bruce Wayne took. Thus the cycle continues.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 22, 2012
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 18, 2012
 
Title: Believe you can change
 
This post is part two of the series Raw Nerve.
 
Carol Dweck was obsessed with failure. You know how some people just seem to succeed at everything they do, while others seem helpless, doomed to a life of constant failure? Dweck noticed that too  and she was determined to figure out why. So she began watching kids, trying to see if she could spot the difference between the two groups.
 
In a 1978 study with Carol Diener, she gave kids various puzzles and recorded what they said as they tried to solve them. Very quickly, the helpless kids started blaming themselves: Im getting confused, one said; I never did have a good rememory, another explained.
 
But the puzzles kept coming  and they kept getting harder. This isnt fun anymore, the kids cried. But still, there were more puzzles.
 
The kids couldnt take it anymore. I give up, they insisted. They started talking about other things, trying to take their mind off the onslaught of tricky puzzles. There is a talent show this weekend, and I am going to be Shirley Temple, one girl said. Dweck just gave them even harder puzzles.
 
Now the kids started getting silly, almost as if they could hide their failure by making it clear they werent trying in the first place. Despite repeatedly being told it was incorrect, one boy just kept choosing brown as his answer, saying Chocolate cake, chocolate cake.1
 
Maybe these results arent surprising. If youve ever tried to play a board game with kids, youve probably seen them say all these things and more (Dweck appears to be missing the part where they pick up the game board and throw all the pieces on the floor, then run away screaming).
 
But what shocked her  and changed the course of her career  was the behavior of the successful kids. Everyone has a role model, someone who pointed the way at a critical moment in their lives, she later wrote. These children were my role models. They obviously knew something I didnt and I was determined to figure it out.2
 
Dweck, like many adults, had learned to hide her frustration and anger, to politely say Im not sure I want to play this anymore instead of knocking over the board. She figured the successful kids would be the same  theyd have tactics for coping with failure instead of getting beaten down by it.
 
But what she found was radically different. The successful kids didnt just live with failure, they loved it! When the going got tough, they didnt start blaming themselves; they licked their lips and said I love a challenge. Theyd say stuff like The harder it gets the harder I need to try.
 
Instead of complaining it wasnt fun when the puzzles got harder, theyd psych themselves up, saying Ive almost got it now or I did it before, I can do it again. One kid, upon being a given a really hard puzzle, one that was supposed to be obviously impossible to solve, just looked up at the experimenter with a smile and said, You know, I was hoping this would be informative.3
 
What was wrong with them?
 
The difference, Dweck discovered, was one of mindset. Dweck had always thought human qualities were carved in stone. You were smart or you werent, and failure meant you werent. That was why the helpless kids couldnt take it when they started failing. It just reminded them they sucked (they easily got confused, they had a bad rememory). Of course it wasnt fun anymore  why would it be fun to get constantly reminded youre a failure? No wonder they tried to change the subject. Dweck called this the fixed mindset  the belief that your abilities are fixed and that the world is just a series of tests that show you how good you are.
 
The successful kids believed precisely the opposite: that everything came through effort and that the world was full of interesting challenges that could help you learn and grow. (Dweck called this the growth mindset.) Thats why they were so thrilled by the harder puzzles  the easier ones werent any sort of challenge, there was nothing you could learn from them. But the really tough ones? Those were fascinating  a new skill to develop, a new problem to conquer. In later experiments, kids even asked to take puzzles home so they could work on them some more.4
 
It took a seventh-grader to explain it to her: I think intelligence is something you have to work forit isnt just given to you Most kids, if theyre not sure of an answer, will not raise their hand But what I usually do is raise my hand, because if Im wrong, then my mistake will be corrected. Or I will raise my hand and say I dont get this. Can you help me? Just by doing that Im increasing my intelligence.5
 
In the fixed mindset, success comes from proving how great you are. Effort is a bad thing  if you have to try hard and ask questions, you obviously cant be very good. When you find something you can do well, you want to do it over and over, to show how good you are at it.
 
In the growth mindset, success comes from growing. Effort is what its all about  its what makes you grow. When you get good at something, you put it aside and look for something harder so that you can keep growing.
 
Fixed-mindset people feel smart when they dont make mistakes, growth-mindset people feel smart when they struggle with something for a long time and then finally figure it out. Fixies try to blame the world when things go bad, growthers look to see what they can change about themselves. Fixies are afraid to try hard  because if they fail, it means theyre a failure. Growthers are afraid of not trying.
 
As Dweck continued her research, she kept finding this difference in all sorts of places. In relationships, growth-mindset people looked for partners who would push them to be better, fixies just wanted someone who would put them on a pedestal (and got into terrible fights when they hit problems). Growther CEOs keep looking for new products and ways to improve, fixies cut research and tried to squeeze profits from old successes. Even in sports, growther athletes got better and better through constant practice, while fixies blamed their atrophying skills on everyone around them.
 
But Dweck applied a growth mindset to the question of mindset  and discovered that your mindset could itself be changed. Even small interventions  like telling students they were doing well because they tried hard, rather than because they were smart  had huge effects. With more work, she could change totally fixed-mindset people into fervent growth-mindset ones.
 
She herself changed, converting from a fervent fixed-mindsetter, always looking for excuses to prove how smart she was, to a growther, looking for new challenges. It was hard: since I was taking more risks, I might look back over the day and see all the mistakes and setbacks. And feel miserable. [You feel like a zero] you want to rush right out and rack up some high numbers. But she resisted the urge  and became a leading psychologist instead.6
 
The first step to getting better is believing you can get better. In her book, Mindset, Dweck explains how to start talking back to your fixed mindset. The fixed mindset says, What if you fail? Youll be a failure. The growth mindset replies, Most successful people had failures along the way.7
 
Now when I first heard about this work, I just thought: thats nice, but I already do all this. I believe fervently that intelligence can change and that talents can be learned. Indeed, Id say Im almost pathologically growth mindset. But even I began to notice there are some things I have a fixed mindset about.
 
For example, I used to think I was introverted. Everyone had always told me that you were either an extroverted person or an introverted person. From a young age, I was quite shy and bookish, so it seemed obvious: I was an introvert.
 
But as Ive grown, Ive found thats hardly the end of the story. Ive started to get good at leading a conversation or cracking people up with a joke. I like telling stories at a party a story or buzzing about a room saying hi to people. I get a rush from it! Sure, Im still not the most party-oriented person I know, but I no longer think we fit into any neat introversion/extroversion buckets.
 
Growth mindset has become a kind of safe word for my partner and I. Whenever we feel the other person getting defensive or refusing to try something because Im not any good at it, we say Growth mindset! and try to approach the problem as a chance to grow, rather than a test of our abilities. Its no longer scary, its just another project to work on.
 
Just like life itself.
 
Next in this series: Look at yourself objectively
 
Carol I. Diener and Carol S. Dweck, An Analysis of Learned Helplessness: Continuous Changes in Performance, Strategy, and Achievement Cognitions Following Failure, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36:5 (May 1978), 451462.
 
Carol Dweck, Mindset: The New Psychology of Success (2007), 3.
 
Carol S. Dweck and Ellen L. Leggett, A Social-Cognitive Approach to Motivation and Personality, Psychological Review, 95:2 (1988), 256273.
 
Claudia M. Mueller and Carol Dweck, Praise for Intelligence Can Undermine Childrens Motivation and Performance, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75:1 (July 1998), 3352.
 
Mindset, 17.
 
Mindset, 225.
 
Carol Dweck, How can you change from a fixed mindset to a growth mindset?, mindsetonline.com (visited 2012-08-18).
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 18, 2012
 
An experience I had as a teenager really drove this lesson home for me, and is partly responsible for successes Ive had since.
 
My Dad had copy of Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain by Betty Edwards lying around. Id always been really bad at drawing - never progressed beyond the kids-drawing phase, got bad feedback on drawing at school, so stopped.
 
Anyway, Edwardss theory is that bad drawers dont look at the thing itself and draw its shape, they translate reality into abstract concepts first and then draw what that concept visually looks like. So Ill look at a face, then decide Ill draw the eye first, query my mind to see what an eye looks like, then draw the generic eye Ive always drawn since I was a child.
 
Whereas a skilled artist looks at the eye in front of them - which looks nothing like the standard symbol for eye - and draws THAT.
 
Edwards has a bunch of exercises to prove this, and one of them triggered a massive epiphany for me.
 
She had a Picasso sketch in the book which was printed upside down on the page. Her instructions were to copy the drawing, keeping it upside down, and never naming the limb/whatever youre drawing, and never turning your drawing right-side-up until its complete.
 
I was sceptical, but decided to test her theory. So I started copying this upside-down drawing, fully expecting it to turn out even worse than usual.
 
When I finished, the drawing was AMAZING. It looked like someone else had done it. It was a genuine likeness. The figure Id drawn looked alive.
 
I went on to learn to draw pretty well. So after that, my mind always looked back and thought - well, if I can learn to DRAW, and I was so BAD at drawing initially, I can pretty much learn to do anything - i.e. the growth mindset.
 
posted by Nabeel
 on August 20, 2012 #
 
I read and enjoyed Dwecks book when it first came out (though it took me a while to internalize the insights, mainly because of my anxiety over fear of failure, ironically).
 
Another great book along similar lines that complements Dwecks is Seligmans Learned Optimism.  Again, he shows how the difference that makes all the difference is mindset, this time between an optimistic mindset and a pessimistic mindset.
 
posted by haig
 on August 20, 2012 #
 
Aaron, great article. Interestingly enough, Angela Lee Duckworth and K. Anders Ericssons work on grit also leads to more or less the same conclusion.
 
Look forward to your next article.
 
posted by Bin
 on August 22, 2012 #
 
You might enjoy Susan Cains Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World that cant stop talking. She makes the fascinating point that introversion/extroversion has little to do with people and social skillsat least directly.
 
Thanks!
 
posted by Chris McKenzie
 on August 24, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 19, 2012
 
Title: Edmund Burke Explains The Dark Knight Rises
 
From Corey Robins fantastic book The Reactionary Mind:
 
Great power, [Burke] suggests in The Sublime and the Beautiful, should never aspire to beand can never actually bebeautiful. What great power needs is sublimity. The sublime is the sensation we experience in the face of extreme pain, danger, or terror. It is something like awe but tinged with fear and dread. Burke calls it delightful horror. Great power should aspire to sublimity rather than beauty because sublimity produces the strongest emotion which the mind is capable of feeling. It is an arresting yet invigorating emotion, which has the simultaneous but contradictory effect of diminishing and magnifying us. We feel annihiliated by great power; at the same time, our sense of self swell[s] when we are conversant with terrible objects. Great power achieves sublimity when it is, among other things, obscure and mysterious, and when it is extreme. In all things, writes Burke, the sublime abhors mediocrity.1
 
In the Reflections, Burke suggests that the problem in France is that the old regime is beautiful while the revolution is sublime. The landed interest, the cornerstone of the old regime, is sluggish, inert, and timid. It cannot defend itself from the invasions of ability, with ability standing in here for the new men of power that the revolution brings forth. Elsewhere in the Reflections, Burke says that the moneyed interest, which is allied with the revolution, is stronger than the aristocratic interest because it is more ready for any adventure and more disposed to new enterprises of any kind. The old regime, in other words, is beautiful, static, and weak; the revolution is ugly, dynamic, and strong. And in the horrors that the revolution perpetratesthe rabble rushing into the bedchamber of the queen, dragging her half-naked into the street, and marching her and her family to Paristhe revolution achieves a kind of sublimity: We are alarmed into reflexion, writes Burke of the revolutionaries actions. Our minds  are purified by terror and pity; our weak unthinking pride is humbled, under the dispensations of a mysterious wisdom.2
 
Beyond these simple professions of envy or admiration, the conservative actually copies and learns from the revolution he opposes. To destroy that enemy, Burke wrote of the Jacobins, by some means or other, the force opposed to it should be made to bear some analogy and resemblance to the force and spirit which that system exerts.3
 
Is it not all here, right down to the moneyed interests allying with the revolution and the revolution throwing the aristocrats from their bedchambers?
 
Burke, Sublime and the Beautiful, 86, 96, 121, 165.
 
Burke, Reflections, 207, 243, 275. Also see Burke, Regicide Peace, 66, 70, 107, 157, 207, 222.
 
Burke, Regicide Peace, 184.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 19, 2012
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 18, 2012
 
Title: Take a step back
 
This post introduces a new series, Raw Nerve.
 
For most of my life, I saw my job as just making good choices. I was the decider, tasked with making the best selection from the options life presented. I could play with this friend or that one, go to this college or that one, take this job offer or the other one.
 
Even my problems I dealt with this way. If someone was annoying me, Id choose to avoid them. If something was bugging me, Id choose to stop thinking about it. I mostly kept my eyes on what was in front of me.
 
But recently Ive started appreciating the virtues of stepping back and trying to see the bigger picture. Instead of just picking the best option, I try to invent new ones. Instead of just avoiding the stuff that bugs me, should I start making plans to fix them.
 
Its given me a weird feeling. I feel more in control of my life, more able to cope with my problems. I feel like Im charting my own destiny, instead of following some track. Its hard to explain, but its a feeling like Im getting stronger  not physically, but psychologically. Its a good feeling. I feel like Im growing as a person.
 
So I started wondering: Is there more where that came from? I realized Ive never stopped to ask whether I could get better at life. After all, in my day job, Im constantly looking for ways to learn and grow  reading the latest books and articles about the field, talking to other people with similar jobs and hearing whats worked for them. Why arent I doing the same thing for life?
 
It turns out to be surprisingly hard. Life comes with no instruction manual and the advice parents give is all over the place. TV and the newspapers dont offer much more than narrow Quick Tips and I never saw a course in this stuff at school. There are self-help books and self-improvement courses, of course, but they seem overly practical: theyre usually less about working through tough problems and more about energizing you to Get Up And Go! And theres philosophy about The Good Life, but it seems to go too far in the other direction: theres very little in there for someone to practically apply.
 
The blogs are a weird mix. There are the blogs on life hacks, which are full of gadgets and gizmos that seem to cause more problems than they solve. There are the anti-procrastination blogs, where the author has a constant stream of epiphanies that all seem to amount to just put away the distractions and get stuff done. And there are the charlatans, who tell you that all your wildest dreams can come true if you just follow their patented advice.
 
So instead of an obvious place to go, Ive just been finding little bits and pieces in all sorts of strange places: psychology experiments, business books, philosophy, self-help, math, and my friends. But since theres no community around it, its hard to discuss it with anyone (trying to persuade other people to be interested in what youre interested in is a fools game).
 
So I figure Ill just start writing about it here and see if anyone cares. Maybe itll grow into something, but even if it doesnt at least Ill clarify my thoughts and hopefully get a few good suggestions for further reading.
 
I dont have a name for what Im talking about or even a good sense of what it is. Im hopeful that will become clearer with practice. But in the meantime, whats helped you get better at life?at thinking, deciding, working, thinking. Whether its a gadget or technique or book or person, Id love it if you posted what youve found most helpful in the comments.
 
Next in this series: Believe you can change
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 18, 2012
 

======================================================================================
Date: August 18, 2012
 
Title: Raw Nerve
 
This is a series of pieces on getting better at life.
 
The best posts are probably 2 and 4.
 
Bonus pieces:
 
Related reading:
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 18, 2012
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 10, 2012
 
Title: Do I have too much faith in science?
 
We live in a society where its almost impossible to give science too much credit. Ever since the atom bomb and the space race, its just been taken for granted that civilization advances through the progress of science. Sciencewe are toldgrows our food, cures our diseases, creates our new technologies, and just generally propels the human race forward.
 
If science is the engine of progress, then those who have not been captured under its spell must be dusty relics of prejudice and caprice. Fields under the sway of hidebound tradition must be bulldozed and renovated in the image of science. Thus doctors, instead of making decisions by random whim, must be forced to practice evidence-based medicine where all their prescriptions are backed by randomized controlled trials. Policymakers, instead of just being bleeding-heart do-gooders, must temper their enthusiasm for regulation by doing cost-benefit analyses to see if their proposals make sense. Managers, instead of following their intuition, must subject their strategies to rigorous experimentthrough A/B tests in the market.
 
But whats weird about this mania for science is how unscientific it all is. As far as I know, no studies have shown that evidence-based medicine leads to better patient outcomes or that companies which practice comprehensive A/B testing are more profitable than those which follow their intuition. And the evidence that science is responsible for stuff like increased life expectancy is surprisingly weak.
 
But theres such a mania for science that even asking these questions seems absurd. How could there possibly be evidence against evidence-based medicine? The whole idea seems like a contradiction in terms. But it is not.
 
Recent decades have seen science encroach on the kitchen, with scientific approaches to cooking and cuisine. Where other chefs might simply follow instructions they found on a yellowing scrap of paper, the new modernists seek to understand the physics behind their actions. This approach has led to some interesting new techniques, but its also led us to understand that some of those silly traditions arent so silly after all.
 
Eggs, for example, were often beaten in copper bowls. Why copper bowls? Chefs might have been able to give you some kind of reason, but it would have sounded silly to scientific ears. But the modernists discovered that the ions in the copper ended up forming complex bonds with the conalbumin in the eggs.
 
This was not something that chefs had ever established as scientific knowledgeno aproned Isaac Newton ever discovered this was the right way to cook the eggsbut it was knowledge chefs had nonetheless. It was, in Polyanis phrase, tacit knowledge, part of the things society genuinely knew but was never able to write down or clearly prove.
 
Scientism systematically destroys tacit knowledge. If chefs were forced to follow evidence-based cooking, not using anything special like a copper bowl until their was a peer-reviewed double-blind randomized controlled trial proving its effectiveness, the result surely would be worse food. So why is it crazy to believe the same attitude leads to worse medicine?
 
In business, too, scientism could be quite destructive. Can Steve Jobs provide a proof for the rightness of every iPhone feature? Can Doug Bowman do a scientific experiment to justify his every shade of blue? Forcing them to could well make their work far worse instead of better.
 
Scientism even fails just within our own heads. If youre struggling with a decision, were taught to approach it more scientifically, by systematically enumerating pros and cons and trying to weight and balance them. Thats what Richard Feynman would do, right? Well, studies have shown that this sort of explicit approach repeatable leads to worse decisions than just going with your gut. Why? Presumably for the same reason: your gut is full of tacit knowledge that its tough to articulate and write down. Just focusing on the stuff you can make explicit means throwing away everything else you knowdestroying your tacit knowledge.
 
Of course, theres no guarantee that just trusting your gut will work either. Intuition and tradition are often just as wrong as scientific cluelessness. And in the cases where they genuinely have little to contribute, throwing them away (or quarantining it until its proven by scientific test) might not be such a bad idea. But Ive always just assumed that this was always truethat tradition and intuition had nothing to contribute, unless carefully coached by scientific practice. That science was the only way to get knowledge, rather than just another way of codifying it. Now, instead of throwing it all away, Im now thinking I ought to spend more time finding ways to harness all that tacit knowledge.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 10, 2012
 
Scientism systematically destroys tacit knowledge. If chefs were forced to follow evidence-based cooking, not using anything special like a copper bowl until their was a peer-reviewed double-blind randomized controlled trial proving its effectiveness, the result surely would be worse food.
 
Really? Why? I think youre hiding some sort of massive background assumption here, and it ought to be dragged out into the light and examined. (Much like how experiments drag out all sorts of unfounded beliefs, or evidence-based medicine examines expensive or deadly quackery.)
 
One day when I was a junior medical student, a very important Boston surgeon visited the school and delivered a great treatise on a large number of patients who had undergone successful operations for vascular reconstruction. At the end of the lecture, a young student at the back of the room timidly asked, Do you have any controls? Well, the great surgeon drew himself up to his full height, hit the desk, and said, Do you mean did I not operate on half the patients? The hall grew very quiet then. The voice at the back of the room very hesitantly replied, Yes, thats what I had in mind. Then the visitors fist really came down as he thundered, Of course not. That would have doomed half of them to their death. God, it was quiet then, and one could scarcely hear the small voice ask, Which half?
 
posted by gwern
 on August 10, 2012 #
 
I want to say a lot but the loudest thoughts are asking a series of questions that play Battleship around the central theme Im trying to tease out: where did this confusion come from? How could someone believe that reliance on the scientific method (or rationality in general) means embracing a belief that the scientific method (or rationality) is the only path to knowledge?
 
You seem to take a narrow view of what science is and how its done. Is this rhetorical?  Are you representing an extreme reductivist worldview to try to make a point?
 
posted by Jrbl
 on August 10, 2012 #
 
I meant in the short-term (because AFAIK there are no peer-reviewed double-blind RCTs of food science), not in the long-term. Do you disagree with that or was I just unclear?
 
Yes, you were unclear and still are. See, this is exactly what I mean by unstated assumptions: why does this matter in the short-term at all? If one does a quality RCT and can then reject use of copper bowls, whats the problem? Arent we unambiguously better off? Yes, of course we are since we need no longer worry about using a non-copper bowl and can save money by not buying niche copper bowls.
 
Why wouldnt we be better off in the short term and long-term both? The only explanation I can come up with is that you are appealing to some sort of hidden background premise like I believe that anything without RCT backing ought to be immediately banned and not allowed at all, which would indeed crush the space of possible bowls or foods down to a tiny one and make us much worse off.
 
Stated baldly like this, this background premise is obviously a terrible idea and doesnt map onto the thinking of any of decent proponents for any scientism.
 
It might make sense if a field is so very contaminated by bad ideas that adding up all the practices, we find that the field makes things worse on net. Then by essentially banning the field, we change our net loss to neither loss nor gain, which at least is an improvement. But such fields are very rare!
 
Even medicine manages to improve health on net. Consider Hansons notorious views on health: he thinks we waste a lot of money and are often made sicker by health care but only around a third of it is wasted, and spending no money on health care would be much worse than the current situation. So a blanket ban on non-RCT-proven stuff would make us worse off if there were no RCT-proven stuff, but of course there is a lot of such stuff, so to conclude that such a ban would be a good or bad idea would require a lot of investigation to see what % of current spending is RCT-approved and what % is not approved and what the final bang per buck estimate might look like Spending much more on EBM would be a good idea, and better heuristics like new treatments need a higher burden of evidence may also be a good idea - but when we stop looking at an apparent strawman, the issue is much subtler.
 
In the case of food, we generally have a pretty high confidence that many foodstuffs are tasty and you dont want to burn them, and things like that. Examples like copper bowls are by far the minority in cooking, so even if every such example were really false, your standard cookbook would still be better than nothing.
 
(Exercise: grab a cookbook like Joy of Food; open to a random page, and see what % of wordcount is discussing apparently unjustified tips like copper bowls. I remember spotting one recently, in the yogurt recipe, cautioning me to not add in too much starter because this would be bad for some unknown reason. I remember it, you see, precisely because it seemed so arbitrary and out of line with the rest of the straightforward instructions. But even this is pretty easily RCTed, if anyone care! And Id bet that theres already results on this either in the biology literature or the yogurt makers internal studies, if one knew where to look, since improving quality by not messing up starter culture volumes is an obvious optimization.)
 
I dont know if you got that from me, but I frequently quote it.
 
I actually got it from Tuftes Data Analysis for Politics and Policy, sorry.
 
posted by gwern
 on August 10, 2012 #
 
These people very much exist, and they tend to troll threads to elicit responses. A recent HN thread had users debating the value of philosophy since it wasnt scientifically testable. When others tried to make an appeal for intellectual honesty, it was ignored.
 
posted by MG
 on August 10, 2012 #
 
The problem is, we have a bunch of bogus tacit knowledge as well.
 
Take, for example, the Monty Hall problem. For anyone not familiar with it, its a game show. You have three doors, behind two are goats and behind the third is a prize. You select one of the doors, and the host opens an unselected door with a goat behind it. The host then offers to let you change your choice.
 
It is, strangely, significantly more favorable to switch. Your selected door has a 33% chance of containing a prize, and the other door has a 66% chance of having the prize. You can find this out with some math, or you can just set up a computer simulation and watch what happens, but it runs completely counter to most peoples intuition about the world.
 
posted by emcmanis
 on August 10, 2012 #
 
As per your argument, the evidence-based approach introduced by science is leading people to inhibit their tacit knowledge attempts. Even thought it happens to be true, it doesnt look like science or scientists fault. Whats beautiful about science though, is the fact that whenever a theory fails, thats taken as progress. Thats knowledge being crafted. And the interesting point here is that (as far as the human history can tell us) virtually all progress in science has started from tacit knowledge based insights. (Therefore, there is still there is a clear difference between intuition that leads to empirical learning and random emotional based non-sense. )
 
posted by Vini
 on August 11, 2012 #
 
science helps to cut the downside, sloppy mistakes and prejustice. but it is not so good at making things from good to great.
 
how to use gut feeling when sending some rover  to mars?
 
posted by toivo
 on August 11, 2012 #
 
I very much agree with you. In a sense our culture over-emphasises rational knowledge and the scientific method. However, there is a whole history of tacit knowledge and unconscious empiricism or what could be described as knowing without understanding, similar to your example with the copper bowl. The ancient Romans used cement without understanding how it worked, the same is true for breeding livestock and plants or brewing beer. Just think of the highly complicated process of indigenous drug preparation involving enzyme inhibitors. I would say that its a good time (As described in Sennetts the craftsman) to remember that the scientific method is not the only way of approaching problems.
 
posted by Michael Hohl
 on August 13, 2012 #
 
youre right to doubt your faith in science. as someone raised in a scientism family, and who studied math/science, ive been thinking about this for a long time. i havent written anything on it for fear of the knee-jerk-ish responses like the ones youve gotten.
 
i am a skeptic above all else. and while i think the scientific method has value and its place, theres a huge amount of knowledge embedded in cultural practices, knowledge that has been built up over time - generations, millenia - that sometimes, even science cannot explain. its not just tacit knowledge that a person has, but tacit knowledge that a community or culture has.
 
some thoughts ive had on this that are not fully-formed:
 
1) the scientific method can only tell us about things where situations can actually be controlled. but real life, involving humans in particular, is much more complex than that. just as an example - its pretty much impossible to do a RCT study of a food substance, because human beings do not live in labs and do not eat the same exact meals and do the same exact things day in, day out. (if you get into the literature, lots has been written on this).
 
2) the law of unintended consequences. the idea that clinical trials will tell us everything that might possibly go right or wrong with a medication continues to be disproven. one of the most egregious examples, in my opinion, are the osteoporosis drugs which have been shown to actually increase certain bone fractures. (im paraphrasing - google for the details.)
 
3) however much we think we can know through science, we will never know what we DONT know. for example: we have some notion about what-all nutrients our bodies need. we have RDAs for vitamins and minerals. but what other substances exist in foods that we need, but we havent yet discovered? the notion of antioxidants being something our bodies need is a very recent thing. or what if its about certain relationships between substances in foods, or certain balances between substances? i could go on, but as i said, these are fuzzy, half-formed ideas cant really get it all out of my head yet.
 
4) from my personal exploration of the relationship between food and health, ive come to the conclusion that we as humans have co-evolved with the foods that we eat. but this is such a complex relationship, and the effect that any one food might have on our body is so difficult to tease out from the effect any other might have i just dont see how science or the scientific method could ever really get to explaining this. especially since (my theory, based in some evidence, is) that this relationship is constantly shifting anyway.
 
commenting on some of the comments:
 
Examples like copper bowls are by far the minority in cooking,
 
how do you know this? there are actually plenty more examples of this than you may realize. there many even be examples that you dont know about.
 
Id bet that theres already results on this either in the biology literature or the yogurt makers internal studies, if one knew where to look, since improving quality by not messing up starter culture volumes is an obvious optimization.
 
having spent a lot of time making yogurt and trying to learn more about/optimize the process (and understand the reasoning behind standard practice), i can tell you that precious little about the process has been studied in a way that would be useful to non-corporations, or in general, in an unbiased way. and if anything has been done internal to companies, good luck finding that data. science in this country is incredibly shaped by society.
 
the monty hall problem is a math/probability problem.  it doesnt really involve the scientific method, which is whats really being discussed here.
 
posted by a.
 on August 15, 2012 #
 
I think you are confusing science with something else.
 
Why would science tell cooks to stop using copper bowls to whisk eggs? A good scientist would do tests first, and those tests would have established that whisking eggs in copper bowls DOES make sense. It would not make sense to tell a cook to stop using copper just because no formal scientist had done a test that it was better.
 
Being pro-science doesnt mean not to ever do anything which hasnt been double blind tested first. Thats an absurd argument.
 
that tradition and intuition had nothing to contribute, unless carefully coached by scientific practice. 
 
What do you think tradition is? While much is hocus pocus, some of it is just things done over and over again and refined over time because they worked. Look at the development of agricultural crops over the last 10,000 years - thats science in action, before the development of the formal scientific method.
 
Where reality intrudes heavily, tradition is bound to be shaped by it, and follow something akin to the scientific principles.
 
posted by KO
 on August 16, 2012 #
 
Ive always just assumed that this was always truethat tradition and intuition had nothing to contribute, unless carefully coached by scientific practice.
 
That assumption is what youre wrestling with, and scientism I hear as being a name for that assumption.  I guess I think of intuition and tradition as deep wells that we can draw on as we choose, and when the bucket comes up we depend on our empirical faculties to judge its content.
 
Scientism, though, would pave over the well.
 
posted by Brian
 on August 17, 2012 #
 
KO says Swartz is confusing science with something else  I believe that something else is Frequentism [1], specifically hypothesis testing where the null hypotheses are completely skeptical of tacit knowledge.
 
Certainly some fields of science follow this approach more than others (though Id be hard pressed to produce an ordered list). On the other hand, as a practicing Bayesian [2], I stand with others objection that what Swartz describes is not scientism.
 
[1] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequentist_inference
[2] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_inference
 
posted by A Strauss
 on August 19, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August  5, 2012
 
Title: What do startup founders want?
 

 
To oversimplify greatly for a second:
 
People in New York want money. People in Los Angeles want fame. People in DC want power. People in Miami want to have fun. But what do people in San Francisco want?
 
Its not money. Sure, a startup that sells for a lot of money is nice, but its clearly not the goal. I think few startup founders would feel good about building something worthless and then tricking a big company into buying it for a lot of money.
 
Its not fame. Sure, Mark Zuckerberg is famous now, but he actually seems more annoyed about that than anything.
 
Its not power, or else the founders of GitHub would look ridiculous for giving all their power away to their employees. Paul Buchheit didnt write Gmail because he wanted to control the actions of its users.
 
Its certainly not having fun. (Although, like most hard things, startups are actually surprisingly fun.)
 
No, I think the thing startup founders want is importance.
 
Importance is a bit like power, but heavily diluted. Power is about being able to make people do something they wouldnt otherwise do. The Instagram founders werent in it for power: they have very little interest in making people take photos they wouldnt otherwise take. But nonetheless, their decisions had a great deal of importance for their users. If they decided to put ads in their app or remove a favorite filter, millions of peoples lives suddenly get a little bit more annoying.
 
Because your tiny decisions have huge impacts on people, when youre important everyone wants to hear what you have to say. You can go to TED and WEF and the audience wants to come up to talk to you, not so much because they want something from you, but because what you think has a big impact on their lives.
 
This is why selling a startup is so hard. It gets you money and fame but it means losing a lot of your importance. Now when you go to TED, youre a has-been; you just answer questions about what the good old days are like.
 
Importance is different from impact. Tim Berners-Lee (inventor of the Web) had a huge impact in the world, but hes not particularly important. He decided long ago that the Semantic Web was the next big thing, but few people cared, because practically there was very little he could actually do about it.
 
Dick Costolo (CEO of Twitter), by contrast, is pretty important. If he decides that Twitter needs a consistent user experience, he can shut down apps millions of people use each day, destroying the companies that build them.
 
We all know the dangers of wanting money or power. But the dangers of wanting importance are little-discussed. Importance tends to require centralizing things, which means restraining innovation and leaving yourself open to the demands of actual power.
 
Imagine Tim had built the Web the same way folks built Twitter. All our web pages would be would be hosted by a single company, accessed through an API that they defined and could change at whim. Web applications would be far weaker than they are today (since it would be hard to store anything interesting on TimCos servers) and powerful corporations would constantly be knocking people offline permanently for various terms-of-service violations (no trademark infringement! no hate speech!).
 
Tim would be much more important in this world, but I dont think the rest of us would be better off.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August  5, 2012
 
This is such an astonishingly wrong and simplistic analysis that Im just confused. What on earth made you think this was worth publishing?
 
posted by kazerad
 on August  5, 2012 #
 
Your metric of importance seems to confuse multiple dimensions  power (your example of Costolo is obviously about power by your own definition), fame (people watch what famous people do, think they are interesting, etc.) and a dimension you dont really focus on that I think is more interesting, which maybe we could call catalyzing.  This is bringing about a change far beyond your own direct powers, by creating a pattern that generates positive feedback.
 
Berners-Lee was catalytic in that sense.  Steve Jobs obviously was.  Brin and Page were catalytic.  I think thats an substantial component of the motivation for most very effective entrepreneurs (whether for profit or not).
 
posted by Jed Harris
 on August  5, 2012 #
 
You claim You can go to TED and WEF and the audience wants to come up to talk to you, not so much because they want something from you, but because what you think has a big impact on their lives.
 
Really? The TED or WEF attendee who has paid big bucks to attend such an expensive event, and so has the priorities of someone who can pay such big bucks to attend such an expensive event, is more interested in the relatively remote generalized impact on their lives, versus the more practical whats-in-it-for-me ?
 
Well, I suppose I cant disprove that, but it strikes me as implausible.
 
I must disclaim Ive attended very few conferences, and never TED or WEF.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on August  5, 2012 #
 
Ill disagree with the tenor of the comments here about the worth of the article insofar as I think its real point was the juxtaposition of the Costolo vs Berners-Lee approaches to affecting the world. I figure that it got where it did by starting with the position that the decentralised approach is a common good in the long run, then asking what motivates one vs the other, and making a leap that the TBL style hinges on a fundamental humbleness in some particular respect.
 
I agree with all the premises and I believe this is a question worth asking and thinking about.
 
But like the previous commenters I have to say that I do not think this notion of importance as a motivation holds up. It is too close to the surface. It also appears muddled: importance as set out here seems a mere variant of power and as such I believe introducing the term merely confounds rather than clarifies. The Instagram founders may not have power over the actions of their users, but they nevertheless have power over the Instagram application. If they decide to change it, it changes. That is also why such a position makes you open to the demands of actual power  you have power, and a greater power can therefore coerce you to exercise your own power in a particular direction of their choosing. If the Instagram founders did not directly control the Instagram app and service, what demands could actual power effectively place on them?
 
posted by Aristotle Pagaltzis
 on August  5, 2012 #
 
In that case, how would you classify Tims motivations in creating the web? Clearly not money, power, or (according to your analysis) importance. Fame? I doubt he was in it for fame, though he did achieve that (in some circles). Maybe yet another category of just wants to build something cool?
 
For that matter, what is the classification of Stallmans motivations (though sometimes it feels like fame). Anti-power? Benevolence?
 
posted by jdt
 on August  7, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 29, 2012
 
Title: What Happens in The Dark Knight Rises
 
Warning: Naturally, spoilers follow.1
 
The film begins by asking: what happens if conservative law-and-order policies actually worked? The answer, we quickly learn, is that it destroys the people behind them. Without anything to fight, Bruce Wayne is just a reclusive withered husk, while Commissioner Gordon is actually going to be fired. Given that these are two of the films most sympathetic characters, we naturally tend to deplore this situation. And so the films first key point: the champions of law-and-order do not truly want to succeed at their stated mission.
 
In a world without (street) crime, the police become merely the errand-boys for the wealthy, not bothering to refocus their efforts on corporate or economic criminals (like Daggett). Gordon sighs at having such quotidian assignments as tracking down wayward members of Congress; meanwhile no one even considers punishing the same Congressman for sexually harassing Selina Kyle. As a result, economic inequality grows unchecked and Gothams citizens are saved from physical attack only to suffer economic depredation (some literally moving into the sewers in the desperate search for a job).
 
The whole thing is the mirror of the beginning of the first film, in which Waynes Keynesian Supertrain project to boost the citys economy is felled by random street crime. Now the ending of street crime is ultimately felled by the failure to create an economy that works for all. (Ras al Ghul: Over the ages, our weapons have grown more sophisticated. With Gotham, we tried a new one: Economics.  Create enough hunger and everyone becomes a criminal.)
 
With the state having withered away to little more than a nightwatchman for the wealthy, private charity is all thats left to fill the widening gap between the horribly poor and the terribly wealthy. But this is ultimately a failure, because most of the wealthy philanthropists are more concerned with their own self-image than actual impact. Worse, those who are making a difference are forced to cancel their charitable programs when the downturn (and questionable business decisions) cause their profits to slump.
 
Into this Rawlsian nightmare walks Bane, a thug who escaped Middle Eastern extraordinary rendition to train with Arab terrorists before heading to Gotham. There hes building an underground vanguard party, constructing a new society literally underneath the decadent old one.
 
Banes activists crash the Gotham Stock Exchange (which is exactly like the NYSE except with a gaudy ticker on the door), using their proletarian roles (bike messenger, shoe shiner, cement mixer) to seize control of the markets and expropriate the wealth of Bruce Wayne, the citys richest man. Having a real enemy revitalizes Wayne, leading him to return to action as Batman and attempt to catch the criminals.
 
But with the Gordon Era on its way out, the police are more concerned with stopping the vigilante Batman than the expropriators, letting them get away. Thus just as Batmans success in stopping crime made himself unnecessary, his clumsy failure is what allows him to return.
 
The activists strike a tactical alliance with certain deluded members of the capitalist class, using their expropriation to engineer a hostile takeover of Wayne Enterprises, eventually allowing them (with a small amount of violence) to take possession of a nuclear weapon.
 
That way, when the vanguardists use proletarian sabotage to secede and declare independence, the US cant intervene and instead leaves the newly-independent city to its own devices.2 (Once again, Wayne has made it possible for his enemies to succeed  they never could have done it without his nuke.) Bane quickly dismantles the repressive state, releasing the prisoners locked up without parole under the harsh law-and-order regime. In the resulting anarchy, the people quickly do what the old establishment wouldnt: string up the bankers (sometimes literally) and redistribute their wealth. (Their show-trials are the mirror to the establishments treatment of organized crime under the Dent Act, harshly punishing the criminals and seizing their assets with limited due process.)
 
Emphasizing that all power ultimately comes from the force of the fist, the police try to reassert their control in a climactic street brawl against Banes vanguardists. However, the situation only gets worse for them as its revealed that Talia, the daughter of the Arab terrorist leader, has arranged the nuke to detonate unavoidably.
 
Batman apparently finally realizes that hes only creating the crime he tries so hard to stop (as The Joker told him, I dont want to kill you! What would I do without you?you complete me), so he fakes his own death as he disposes of the bomb. He ends the film in Italy, apparently leading a normal life with an attractive reformed catburglar.3
 
As Neil Kandalgaonkar notes in comments:
 
If Bruce Wayne had never used his resources to improve matters, Gotham would be a thriving (albeit often corrupt) city. Instead it has suffered from terrorist attacks killing prominent city officials, destroying most bridges, devastating several public buildings, giant smoking holes in the ground, and even ruined the real estate value of the more desirable neighborhoods.
 
The predictable result, not shown in the movie, is capital flight from a city which embraced law and order by any and all means, and instead got anarchy and ruin. The billionaire vigilante himself flees the city, having secured his fortune with offshore banking accounts.
 
Thanks especially to Aaron Badys review for clarifying my thinking on some of these points.
 
Unlike with Cuba, Vietnam, Nicaragua, etc.
 
Admittedly, this move is somewhat undercut by the fact that before he left he decided to set up a sequel series by sending a promising young cop (whose middle name turns out to be Robin) on a mission that ends with Robin watch a top policeman prefer to let the entire population of the city die rather than disobey outdated bureaucratic orders. Disgusted, Robin throws away his badge and sets off to continue Batmans tactics of vigilantism, inheriting the Batcave.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 29, 2012
 
Excellent work. Given the two hours and forty-five minutes of explosions alternating with out-of-nowhere plot twists, I doubt that anybody else will derive a more coherent thesis from the film.
 
Going back to the second movie, the attempt to drive the mob from Gotham only cleared the way for a better class of criminal. More devious and deadly, and even willing to use terrorist tactics.
 
And in the third, your thesis is strengthened by the fact that the vanguardists are only able to take over the city using the billionaire vigilantes money, his arsenal, and the nuclear weapon derived from his energy research efforts.
 
If Bruce Wayne had never used his resources to improve matters, Gotham would be a thriving (albeit often corrupt) city. Instead it has suffered from terrorist attacks killing prominent city officials, destroying most bridges, devastating several public buildings, giant smoking holes in the ground, and even ruined the real estate value of the more desirable neighborhoods.
 
The predictable result, not shown in the movie, is capital flight from a city which embraced law and order by any and all means, and instead got anarchy and ruin. The billionaire vigilante himself flees the city, having secured his fortune with offshore banking accounts.
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on July 30, 2012 #
 
I just want to clarify: its clear that Bruce Waynes father had the right idea, using public works to improve the economy. But that went out of fashion in the 60s and 70s.
 
Bruce Wayne is never pictured as following in his fathers footsteps, using public works to solve societys problems. Instead, much like the USA in the 80s and since, he uses physical punishment, imprisonment, and extra-legal tactics to wage war on the mob. Which is a euphemism for the drug trade, as is made explicit in all the movies. Waynes War on Drugs knows no limit in its tactics - military weaponry, ubiquitous surveillance, invasions of privacy, computer hacking, even torture to extract information.
 
In the first movie, Batman was arguably defending the city from an external threat. But its this War on Drugs (and complete inattention to the underlying social issues) which causes literally all of the horrible events in the second and third movies.
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on July 30, 2012 #
 
A small technicality - Batman is set in Gotham, not New York.  Therefore Bane and his men crash the Gotham Stock Exchange, not the New York Stock Exchange.
 
posted by Kyle Graves
 on July 30, 2012 #
 
I knew youd love it.
 
posted by Gordon Mohr
 on July 30, 2012 #
 
Actually Bruce didnt invest in defense industries, Wayne Enterprises did when he was a kid and continued that track after he went missing. Fox shut down and took all the prototypes from the Defense subsidiaries under his watch, i.e. when he became CEO and Chair of the board.
 
The other subtext I think your review is missing, is the general belief by some wealthy individuals that they are above the law, and Im not talking about Bruce Wayne.
 
If you look at it another way, the first movie was about how Gotham should be destroyed and hang the casualties. i.e. the innocents. The second was the legacy of saving Gotham (i.e. the joker was created by the gas used to terrorize the population). The last was the implications of using the law with limited checks and boundaries. Both the cops and Bane used the law to their own means (remember Gordon in court saying where is the lawyers and the jury, yet the Dent act withheld parole and weakened the evidence used to convict people in order to have law and order).
 
Finally, what happened is that the Batman replaced Dent as a symbol Gotham could believe in, one that didnt rely on lies to work.
 
posted by Paul
 on July 30, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 23, 2012
 
Title: Is Awkwardness Avoidable?
 
In his brilliant book Awkwardness, Adam Kotsko analyzes the US version of the television show The Office, concluding it, unlike its British counterpart, shies away from the emancipatory potential of awkwardness by concluding its ultimately the result of inherently awkward individuals.
 
As his key example, he cites the arc of Charles Miner (The Wires Idris Elba), a high-powered Dunder Mifflin executive who visits the Scranton branch for a short while as part of his attempts to improve northeast sales. Miners arrival forces Jim into a series of awkward comic mishaps, thus suggesting Jims normal level of cool isnt just because hes a naturally cool person but only because hes particularly well-suited to his normal situation. But Miner ultimately reveals himself to be overly aggressive, thereby, Kotsko argues, showing Jims awkwardness was merely a result of Miner being a fundamentally awkward person and thus withdrawing the tentative suggestion that awkwardness might actually be situational.
 
I think this is a misreading that shows the limits of a theory of awkwardness that lacks a notion of competence. For this arc shows precisely the opposite of what Kotsko says it does: it shows that awkwardness is fundamentally situational.
 
Miners addition to the series marks the rare appearance of a character that is more competent than Jim. However much Jim may feel himself above the petty stressors of the Scranton office, Miner is far above that, executing with a similar level of suave at a much higher rung in the organization. When Jim comes face-to-face with a superior talent, it immediately reduces him to the level of gibbering awkwardness his coworkers are always finding themselves in, thereby demonstrating Jims level of comfort isnt an innate character trait, but simply the result of being well-adapted to his absurd environment.
 
The reveal of Miners aggression is not an undercutting but an emphasis of this theme. How did Miner get to be so cool? Was he just born with even more innate coolness than Jim and thus is able to be awkward in fewer situations? On the contrary, this coda reveals. Miner got to where he is through an aggressive ambition. His relentless striving has forced him to be competent in more and more business situations so he can move up the corporate ladder.
 
The Office operates under a sort of Peter Principle of awkwardness. The Peter Principle says employees are promoted to the level of their incompetence (since as long as they remain competent, they keep getting promoted). The Office demonstrates that being incompetent is awkward, so people are thereby promoted to the level of their awkwardness. Thus Michael Scott (Steve Carrell), who is actually a quite talented and thoroughly comfortable salesman, gets promoted to regional manager, where he is an awkward and incompetent dolt. We can only assume that Miner is normally at the level of his awkwardness as well; he only seems cool when slumming it in Scranton, the same way that Jim only gets to seem cool by being unambitious enough to persist in a job he is obviously too good for. It is our ambition that makes us awkward, the show argues.
 
This is emphasized in the later plot where David Wallace (Andy Buckley), who appears as a confident corporate CFO in earlier seasons, gets made redundant in Dunder Mifflins acquisition by Sabre and is forced to retire to his suburban mansion with his generous severance package. Without a corporate ladder to climb but with his ambition intact, he now finds himself working on a startup (producing a vacuum for childrens toys called Suck It). But his competence as an upper executive is worthless as a startup founder and makes him so painfully awkward that even Michael cant stomach it. (Later, when Wallace returns to the corporate world, hes immediately unawkward again.)
 
The clear message is the opposite of Kotskos reading: we are all awkward when were out of our depth; our only escape from awkwardness is to develop a competence for a particular situation. But even that is short-lived: our ambition will drive us to leave such non-awkward comforts for the next challenge  and even if we dont, the vagaries of economic forces may still push us into a role we are ill-suited for. The only refuge from this pervasive awkwardness is the pervasive boredom of unambition.
 
P.S. Kotskos followup, Why We Love Sociopaths is even better.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 23, 2012
 
I think youre right, but that you stop your analysis one layer to soon.  Awkwardness is not just a result of operating beyond ones level of competence, but the inability to handle ones incompetence with self awareness and grace.
 
Culturally I this we in the US are stunningly bad at doing this; we relentlessly drum home the notion in our education system that failure, or not knowing the correct answer, is shameful.  We crave certainty in our religion and politics.  We instill fear of incompetence, and consume masses of media devoted to savaging people failing to live up to various standards.
 
Perhaps all Im really saying is that operating out of ones depth with self awareness and grace is just one more possible skill set, and awkwardness is the result of lacking that skill.  And that it is not a skill we devote much attention to cultivating.  Outside of some hacker and entrepreneurial circles fail better is mostly taken as nonsensical.
 
posted by Emile
 on July 23, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July  8, 2012
 
Title: Thoughts on Citizen Kane
 
In Three Uses of the Knife, Mamet quotes Stanislavsky as saying there are two kinds of play. The kind where the thing is absolutely perfect, the film ends and you shout Bravo! and youre elated walking out to the car and then have forgotten the thing entirely by the time you get home. And the kind where somethings not quite right and so it sticks with you, gnaws at you, because the notes dont quite resolve.
 
Citizen Kane is definitely the second kind of movie.
 
To be sure, it had its moments of sheer genius. Number one, in my mind, is juxtaposing Welles performance as the young Kane gracefully dancing with a showgirl at an office party against him as a much older Kane stumbling in the effort to trash a room in his Florida mansion. In both cases, theres an absolutely beautiful physicality to the performance and the notion that the same actor was capable of doing both at the same age is nothing short of stunning.
 
The film is widely-hailed for the cinematographic innovation of deep focus, using tricks with projections and lenses to keep foreground and background in focus at the same time. But the effect is even more interesting than the technique: the film is filled with long shots where tons of action goes on through staging but the camera never cuts away. A character in the foreground talks to a character in the background, they pace, they swap places, and the camera might pan a bit (but usually not) but it never cuts.
 
And when it does cut, it always cuts in a sort of overlapping way. The standard modern movie shot is the over-over-two-shot: characters A and B are talking, facing each other; the screen alternates between a shot of A filmed over the shoulder of B and vice versa. You can clearly see the people but you lose all sense of the space that theyre in, since your perspective is constantly flipping back and forth.
 
Kane does pretty much the opposite, almost every new shot overlaps in some way with the previous one, so you never lose your place. A shot might go from wide to tight or tight to wide or, in some cases, shift slightly to the left or right, but it almost never completely flips direction, and when it does (as when Kane enters the newsroom for the first time) it flips around a very noticeable piece of the set, so its extremely obvious what happened.
 
This may have been the result of some deep insecurity about confusing an audience mostly used to watching plays from fixed seats, but I like it. The result is to give the film a tremendous physicality that makes it all feel much more substantial. This sort of thing was apparently extremely common in the early days of film, which makes me wonder why its so rare now. (The main modern exception is There Will Be Blood, which was intentionally a period piece.)
 
But even among older films Kane distinguishes itself: most films have clear staging because theyre simply staged as plays, with a static camera watching a flat scene. Kanes sets, innovatively, have ceilings and a full complement of walls and while action feels staged in them they never really feel like theyre on a stage.
 
But in the scheme of things, it has to be admitted, these are small things. Kane suffers from far bigger problems. The first, and most blatant, is that aside from Welles the cast simply cannot act. Well, they cannot act in movies, at least. Were this a radio show, they would have been fantastic  close your eyes and you hear nothing but strong, stirring performances. Were they on stage, they likely also would have done just fine. But this was their first role in film and apparently no one stopped to tell them that in the movies, we can see your face.
 
Their faces are consistently either blank, as if they forgot they were supposed to move it to and not just their voice, or overwrought, as if they were exaggerating their features so they would carry through to the cheap seats. In either case, watching them destroys any sense of realism that the careful shot construction has built up and brings the whole thing to the verge of melodrama.
 
The other big problem is the script. The spiraling effect of overlapping tellings of Kanes life (a bit like the overlapping cuts, I suppose?) may have been a brilliant formal innovation, but it doesnt really add much to the film. Instead of following the through-line of a strong and compellng story, were constantly bouncing back and forth in time, with interruptions at key moments. What do these interruptions get us? As far as I can tell, they just slow the film down.
 
(The best argument I can make for them is that they emphasize the fact that Kane drove those who were closest to him away. This makes some sense for Susan and Jed, but Bernstein is still loyal to him and Thatcher is dead, so what does that emphasize?)
 
The modern excuse for this kind of early flash-forward is to set up a big mystery which only the full story can resolve (Damages is an egregious example). Kane kind of does this with the famous Rosebud (although since we see this first-hand, it doesnt explain why the whole investigative-obituarist plotline is necessary). Perhaps it was just terribly spoiled for me, but Rosebud did not feel like a particularly compelling mystery. Especially with all the questions raised by the News on the March sequence, it was really the last of the things I was curious about. (And the notion that an editor would be so curious about it as to waste that much money on an answer really belies the presentation of journalism in the rest of the film.)
 
(Im also upset that the film wasted a great opportunity for the ending. It currently ends with a speech by the investigative obituarist, saying that he never figured out what Rosebud was but even if he did it was probably just another ill-fitting piece in the mans great jigsaw puzzle. Then the camera pulls out and cuts to a wider shot and cuts again and eventually cuts to a whole new scene where someone pulls a sled out of a pile and throws into into a fire and then we cut to the sled and see the name Rosebud as it gets licked with flames. The obvious ending is to have the camera pull back in one steady shot as we hear the jigsaw puzzle speech until amidst this enormous pile of junk the sled is just in foreground, with Rosebud written on its side, as the gaggle of journalists wanders off in background. Whats all this deep focus stuff for if youre not going to use it for a movie-making shot like that!)
 
The film does have some great bits about journalism, but it also has some weird lapses. Theres hardly anything of substance about the Spanish-American War, which I would have thought was the most interesting tale of Hearsts life. The film is weirdly afraid to leave the country (it follows Kane to Chicago, but not to Europe) or even the building (I guess street scenes would have been too expensive), making it feel a bit cooped-up and claustrophobic.
 
But the most frustrating thing, script-wise, is that it raises the grand questions of ambition and money and power and answers them with just a giant muddle. Kane was incapable of loving but desperate to be loved, were told repeatedly, but what kind of sense does that make? There are some great moments: in an early precursor of Fair and Balanced, Kane prints a brave Statement of Principles promising to always tell the truth on his front page, just above a story about a murder he invented. But this is on day one! There is no sense that power corrupts or even, as Caro would have it, that power reveals. Kane just stay the same throughout and as his means allow him to grow the size of his gestures, he also grows the size of his failures. Maybe this is an interesting philosophical point (dont count on scale to save you?) but a story so static doesnt work particularly well as drama. Caro would have told it as an epic rise and fall. Kane would have told it as an epic rise. But Welles just tells it as a flatline. Its like a Caro subject without the Caro, or the subject.
 
I put this criticism last because its the one Im most uncomfortable about. Maybe Welles was just so far ahead of his time that he decided to critique the next century of biopics in advance. People dont actually change, Kane tells us; they just play out the same mistakes on larger and larger scales, over and over again, in patterns big and small. And if so, I take it all back and this critique is actually a tremendous credit. But it sure doesnt feel like its trying to be a deconstructionist film.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July  8, 2012
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July  6, 2012
 
Title: Libertarianism and the State
 
This is a parody of a post by Alex Tabarrok defending employer tyranny.
 
Over at Marginal Revolution, Alex Tabarrok and Tyler Cowen are upset about what they call lack of freedom in the country. They give a grab bag of peculiar examples such as how people can be arrested for smoking drugs, not paying debts, and, once in prison, can be forbidden from reading books, and more.
 
In other words, the MRers have discovered that the most basic governments are sovereign which means that citizens can be put in jail for just about any reason. Simply put, an government can arrest you if they dont like you. This is a surprise?
 
The MRers do not adequately acknowledge that citizens have the same rights as politicians. Citizens can leave the country for any reason and they can refuse to enter any country. If you dont like the politices of the United States, or Australia or Venezuela you dont have to live there or even visit. Indeed, citizens have more rights than politicians since citizens are not subject to judicial review; that is, politicians are typically prohibited from passing laws against certain political viewpoints but citizens are not prohibited from only entering countries where those viewpoints are marginal.
 
If you think that the freedom to leave is without value, bear in mind that under dictatorships and totalitarian states governments could prevent citizens from leaving and from moving. The freedom to leave was hard won. We should not disparage the liberation brought by the right to exit.
 
Turning to the economics, the MRers are so outraged by an governments legal possibilities that they fail to notice that most governments do not in fact arrest people for smoking drugs or for failing to pay debts. Why not? The reason is that these rights are often more valuable to the citizen than to the politician and thus both citizen and politician can be made better off if the citizen keeps the rights. If the politician values the right more than the citizen then the politician buys the right with lower taxes or less regulation in other areas. If the citizen values the right more than the politician then the citizen retains the right at an otherwise higher tax rate. The politician gets the right only when the politician pays.
 
This is not to say that abuses do not occur, they do, as in all relationships and on both sides, but the MRers lump abuses and mutually profitable exchanges togetherthats dangerous because in regulating abuses it is very easy to do away with mutually profitable exchanges.
 
The greater the productivity of citizens and the higher their incomes the less citizens will be willing to sell rights for lower taxes (i.e. the more willing they will be to pay for better regulatory conditions). Citizens gain more autonomy as they and their society become more productive. Thus, the best protector of citizen autonomy is high productivity and economic growth.
 
To understand freedom and true coercion let us remember that American citizens have the freedom to leave and visit other countries, a freedom that gun, barbed wire and electrified fence deny to many millions of less fortunate citizens from around the world.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July  6, 2012
 
Dude. Your blog is better than MR. But Alex was totally justified going after Crooked Timber, that post was terrible. And at least he gave relevant points responding to the argument! You are better than this.
 
posted by Ben
 on July  6, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July  5, 2012
 
Title: Thinking Clearly About Piece-Work
 
My friend Jonathan Zittrain has been working on a book about how the return of piece-work will destroy America. As someone who kind of misses piece-work, it made me want to think through the issues involved.
 
Because, in the real world, competition is imperfect, when a company sells something it earns a surplus. That surplus then must be divided between capital and labor, or more concretely, the company and the employee. The terms of distribution are determined by the employment agreement (i.e. how much the employee will get paid).
 
If labor has all the power, it will want almost all of the surplus, so itd demand an employee agreement where it gets paid a big chunk per good produced  this is basically piece-work. If capital has all the power, it will want to pay employees barely enough to stay alive and be able to show up for work  this is basically wages. So, to a first approximation, wages are what you get when capital is in charge and piece-work is what you get when labor is in charge.
 
But there are some additional considerations. The transaction costs for capital are relatively low  you can invest in a whole bunch of companies at a time, whereas you can really only do a couple jobs at a time (or usually just one) and its quite painful to find another one. So employees also want insurance  they want to guarantee theyll keep getting paid even when the market for the stuff they produce declines. Again, we can imagine two extremes: if labor is in charge, itll want a job for life, where getting downsized is inconceivable; if capital is in charge, itll want to employ people for exactly as long as their marginal product is profitable  which means staffing up in booms and downsizing freely in busts (and not just business cycle booms and busts  companies want to hire lots of temporary workers for Christmas, for example).
 
Now obviously a job for life doesnt make a ton of sense in a piece-work world. If AT&T has guaranteed you a job for life with steady wages, then it makes sense for it to invest in retraining you for some different part of the business when mechanical telephone switches get replaced by computer servers. Its less clear how this would work in a piece-work deal. But the fact is theres no reason the insurance part should be tied to the wages. In Denmark, for example, if your job disappears the government simply pays you 90% of your old salary until you find a new one (up to some cap, of course). Theres no reason piece-work cant coexist with this kind of social insurance system, which would seem to be the choice of our all-powerful labor.
 
But thats treating labor as a monolithic entity. The third thing wages do is collapse differences in pay between workers. For example, its well established that programmer productivity varies by an order of magnitude  the best programmers at a company can be ten times as productive as the worst programmers  but Ive never heard of a company where programmer pay varies by anywhere near that much. Really great programmers might be paid double or perhaps even triple the worst programmers, but Ive never heard of anything close to a 10x difference.
 
The one place where you do see these really huge differences is in CEO pay, but even this isnt really a counterexample since CEO is a job with no intra-company reference class. That is, its not like companies will have one CEO getting paid $1.2M and a another getting paid $12M (indeed, Id guess companies with co-CEOs find them getting paid the same amount)  instead, the order-of-magnitude differences are all found across companies.
 
But order-of-magnitude differences are totally possible with piece-work, especially the kind of intellectual piece-work that Zittrain is concerned with. Krugman has bragged that he writes faster than anyone in journalism and its quite possible to imagine him turning out columns in a tenth the time of Barbara Ehrenreich (who turned down the NYT op-ed columnist job because it was too time-consuming). So wages might be a way of quietly redistributing money from the speedy Krugmans to the dawdling Ehrenreichs. But just as with social insurance, you can imagine this role being taken up by the government instead: through progressive taxation.
 
Now according to classic economic theory, these changes wouldnt just be details of style, but would increase the size of the overall pie. And, on the squishy side, theyd provide much greater scope for human freedom. Assuming I was guaranteed a decent wage either way, Id far rather be able to stay up late working one night in exchange for blowing off work the next. Not to mention getting to work the hours I want, from the place I want, in the way I want, etc.
 
Now the practical fact is that most jobs dont have a concrete enough product to be amenable to piece-work. Theyre a mixture of all sorts of different tasks, require interaction with a specific group of other people, and have all sorts of other features that kind of force them to be your usual office job. But none of that applies to Zittrain  hes talking about jobs that are already piece-work and arguing that they shouldnt be. But it seems to me like, if youre on the side of labor, your preferred solution should be more social insurance and progressive taxation instead.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July  5, 2012
 
Regarding  working on a book about how the return of piece-work will destroy America. - I hope the book is as you describe! (i.e. has that perspective - Im looking forward to it).
 
On But it seems to me like, if youre on the side of labor, your preferred solution should be more social insurance and progressive taxation instead.
 
OK, but how about an alternate more local solution if such a preferred global solution seems too difficult politically?
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on July  7, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: June 26, 2012
 
Title: New: The Pokayoke Guide to Developing Software
 
Ive put together a new guide for developing software, from idea to architectural details. The idea was to combine all the good ideas Id heard from various areas of software development into a single, concise document. Ive also added some new stuff  I think my need/idea model is actually a pretty good way to generate startup (and other) ideas.
 
The Pokayoke Guide to Developing Software
 
Im eager for suggestions and feedback.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 26, 2012
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: June 20, 2012
 
Title: America After Meritocracy: Chris Hayes The Twilight of The Elites
 
[crossposted from Crooked Timber]
 
In his new book, The Twilight of the Elites: America After Meritocracy, Chris Hayes manages the impossible trifecta: the book is compellingly readable, impossibly erudite, and  most stunningly of all  correct. At the end, I was left with just two quibbles: first, the books chapter on pop epistemology thoroughly explicated how elites got stuff wrong without bothering to mention the non-elites who got things right, leaving the reader with the all-too-common impression that getting it right was impossible; and second, the book never assembled its (surprisingly sophisticated) argument into a single summary. To discuss it, I feel we have to start with remedying the latter flaw:
 
Our nations institutions have crumbled, Hayes argues. From 20002010 (the Fail Decade), every major societal institution failed. Big businesses collapsed with Enron and Worldcom, their auditors failed to catch it, the Supreme Court got partisan in Bush v. Gore, our intelligence apparatus failed to catch 9/11, the media lied us into wars, the military failed to win them, professional sports was all on steroids, the church engaged in and covered up sex abuse, the government compounded disaster upon disaster in Katrina, and the banks crashed our economy. How did it all go so wrong?
 
Hayes pins the blame on an unlikely suspect: meritocracy. We thought we would just simply pick out the best and raise them to the top, but once they got there they inevitably used their privilege to entrench themselves and their kids (inequality is, Hayes says, autocatalytic). Opening up the elite to more efficient competition didnt make things more fair, it just legitimated a more intense scramble. The result was an arms race among the elite, pushing all of them to embrace the most unscrupulous forms of cheating and fraud to secure their coveted positions. As competition takes over at the high end, personal worth resolves into exchange value, and the elite power accumulated in one sector can be traded for elite power in another: a regulator can become a bank VP, a modern TV host can use their stardom to become a bestselling author (try to imagine Edward R. Murrow using the nightly news to flog his books the way Bill OReilly does). This creates a unitary elite, detached from the bulk of society, yet at the same time even more insecure. You can never reach the pinnacle of the elite in this new world; even if you have the most successful TV show, are you also making blockbuster movies? bestselling books? winning Nobel Prizes? When your peers are the elite at large, you can never clearly best them.
 
The result is that our elites are trapped in a bubble, where the usual pointers toward accuracy (unanimity, proximity, good faith) only lead them astray. And their distance from the way the rest of the country really lives makes it impossible for them to do their jobs justly  they just dont get the necessary feedback. The only cure is to reduce economic inequality, a view that has surprisingly support among the population (clear majorities want to close the deficit by raising taxes on the rich, which is more than can be said for any other plan). And while Hayes is not a fan of heightening the contradictions, it is possible that the next crisis will bring with it the opportunity to win this change.
 
This is just a skeletal summary  the book itself is filled with luscious texture to demonstrate each point and more in-depth discussion of the mechanics of each mechanism (I would call it Elster meets Gladwell if I thought that would be taken as praise). So buy the book already. Now, as I said, I think Hayes is broadly correct in his analysis. And I think his proposed solution is spot on as well  when we were fellows together at the Harvard Center for Ethics, I think we annoyed everyone else with our repeated insistence that reducing economic inequality was somehow always the appropriate solution to each of the many social ills the group identified.
 
But when talking to other elites about this proposal, I notice a confusion thats worth clarifying, about the structural results of inequality, rather than the merely quantitative ones. Class hangs over the book like a haunting spectre (theres a brief comment on p. 148 that Mills [had] a more nuanced theory of elite power than Marxs concept of a ruling class) but I think its hard to see how the solution relates to the problem without it. After all, we started by claiming the problem is meritocracy, but somehow the solution is taxing the rich?
 
The clue comes in thinking clearly about the alternative to meritocracy. Its not picking surgeons by lottery, Hayes clarifies, but then what is it? Its about ameliorating power relationships altogether. Meritocracy says there must be one who rules, so let it be the best; egalitarianism responds why must there? Its the power imbalance, rather than inequality itself, thats the problem.
 
Imagine a sci-fi world in which productivity has reached such impressive heights that everyone can have every good they desire just from the work young kids do for fun. By twiddling the knobs on their local MakerBot, the kids produce enough food, clothing, and iPhones to satisfy everyone. So instead of working, most people spend their days doing yoga or fishing. But scarcity hasnt completely faded away  theres still competition for the best spots at the fishing hole. So we continue to let those be allocated by the market: the fishing hole spot is charged for and the people who really want it earn the money to pay for it by helping people with various chores.
 
In this sort of world, inequality doesnt seem like much of a problem. Sure, some people get the best fishing hole spots, but thats because they did the most chores. If you want the spot more than they do, you can do more work. But the inequality doesnt come with power  the guy with the best fishing hole spot cant say fuck me or youre fired.
 
This sci-fi world may sound ridiculous, but its basically the one Keynes predicted wed soon be living in:
 
Now it is true that the needs of human beings may seem to be insatiable. But they fall into two classes  those needs which are absolute in the sense that we feel them whatever the situation of our fellow human beings may be, and those which are relative in the sense that we feel them only if their satisfaction lifts us above, makes us feel superior to, our fellows. Needs of the second class, those which satisfy the desire for superiority, may indeed be insatiable; for the higher the general level, the higher still are they. But this is not so true of the absolute needs  a point may soon be reached, much sooner perhaps than we are all of us aware of, when these needs are satisfied in the sense that we prefer to devote our further energies to non-economic purposes.
 
[] But, of course, it will all happen gradually, not as a catastrophe. Indeed, it has already begun. The course of affairs will simply be that there will be ever larger and larger classes and groups of people from whom problems of economic necessity have been practically removed.
 
And thats what a reduction in economic inequality could achieve. The trend in recent decades (since the fall of the Soviet Union and the ruling classs relief that There Is No Alternative) has been for the people at the top to seize all the economic gains, leaving everyone else increasing insecure and dependent on their largesse. (Calling themselves job creators, on this view, is not so much a brag as a threat.) But with less inequality, it could be otherwise. Instead of a world in which there are a handful of big networks with the money to run television shows, everyone could afford to have their Sunday morning conversations filmed and livestreamed. Instead of only huge conglomerates having the capital and distribution to launch new product lines, everyone could make and market their own line of underwear or video games (instead of just elite Red Sox pitchers).
 
Even on strict efficiency grounds, this strikes me as a more alluring view than the usual meritocracy. Why put all your eggs in one basket, even if its the best basket? Surely youd get better results by giving more baskets a try.
 
You can argue that this is exactly where technology is bringing us  popular kids on YouTube get made into huge pop sensations, right?  and the genius of Hayes book is to show us why this is not enough. The egaliatarian demand shouldnt be that we need more black pop stars or female pop stars or YouTube sensation pop stars, but to question why we need elite superstars at all. I hope Hayes next book shows us what the world without them is like.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 20, 2012
 
What Keynes predicted reflects the values of the world that I thought I grew up in. I dont live in Canada anymore. I wonder how much of the Nordic model values remain.
 
posted by bradbell.tv
 on June 21, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: June  8, 2012
 
Title: Perfect Institutions
 
In pretty much every major city in this country, theres a Hollister Co. clothing store  there are over 500 of them in all. Walk inside and its like being transported: the windows are shuttered so they control the light, the entrance has an L-shaped route so that you dont catch a hint of the outside world, the floors and ceilings have been replaced with new patterns, thumping music controls the sound, special scents are pumped into the air to control what you smell. An attractive young person greets you at the door. Youre in a different world.
 
And, to a first approximation, this new world is perfect. Sure, if you search hard, maybe you can find a ruffled edge on a shirt somewhere, but its hardly enough to spoil the illusion. And this is what strikes me: that in every major city, in this deeply-flawed country, you can find a little bit of perfection.
 
No one person, I am sure, can accomplish this kind of perfection. Think about yourself being responsible for creating such a place. Surely theres some part of it youre not capable of doing  do you know where to find the perfect music and the perfect scent and someone to tile the ceiling and someone to take a perfect photograph for the wall and on and on? And even if you are that kind of heroic generalist, who can handle all of that, could you maintain it without flagging, day after day, without loosening your standards, without giving in to the exhaustion that maintaining such a perfect appearance takes? OK, perhaps you have more willpower than I  but unless youre Amy Goodman, even you must take ill sometimes, must have a family emergency to attend to, or something! Nobodys perfect, right?
 
And yet, here they are, five hundred stores of perfection. (You may detest what they are perfect at, but thats not my point. The point is that they have a vision and make it stick.) How do they do it?
 
Its obvious, you say. They dont just have one person  they have a whole bunch. When one falls down on the job, or skips out sick, the others pick up the slack. But those others are imperfect too. It seems far from preordained that a bunch of imperfection combines to create the perfect  it seems just as plausible that combining imperfect people causes the imperfections to multiply, that the whole is far less than the sum of its parts (Im sure weve all been in such situations).
 
The difference between these two fates  between peoples imperfections canceling each other out versus amplifying each other  is institutions, the social structures that guide people in their actions. Hollister seems gifted with an amazing set of institutions. I dont know the details, but we can imagine them: Everyone must show up for their shift an hour early. If you dont show, a manager calls in a replacement. The managers keep an eye on your performance and if you dont do a good enough job folding shirts, youre reprimanded or replaced. Perhaps a roving brand protection squad goes around ensuring local managers are upholding the high national standards. And on and on. Every failsafe has a failsafe.
 
If youve ever tried building an organization yourself, you know how hard it is to get something like this right. And yet the world is filled with organizations that seem to do it effortlessly. This is the paradox at the heart of Kafkas The Trial and its one that continues to astonish me. How do they do it? And how come no one else is curious about the details of their success?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June  8, 2012
 
Isnt there a huge industry devoted to analysing business practices to try and work this out? (Im not saying that in a you fool way, I just always assumed that was the intent of a big chunk of business studies.)
 
And if thats true, I wonder if its actually like what I think the movie industry is. Essentially, there are some necessary conditions to producing a viable product, and then the rest of it is pretty much undeterminable. Nobody learns much from the necessary conditions apart from really slow aggregation, because you fail anyway for uncontrollable reasons even if you do them.
 
posted by Danny
 on June  8, 2012 #
 
Isnt there a huge industry devoted to analysing business practices to try and work this out? (Im not saying that in a you fool way, I just always assumed that was the intent of a big chunk of business studies.)
 
If there is, I havent found it yet. Theres a business books market that sells highly-oversimplified anecdotes about especially-quirky things some CEOs do, but that hardly seems like the same thing. Any ideas where else to look?
 
And if thats true, I wonder if its actually like what I think the movie industry is. Essentially, there are some necessary conditions to producing a viable product, and then the rest of it is pretty much undeterminable. Nobody learns much from the necessary conditions apart from really slow aggregation, because you fail anyway for uncontrollable reasons even if you do them.
 
Well, there are two things here: strategy and execution. I agree strategy may be like this, but execution seems like a much more solvable problem, and thats what Im focused on here. I dont have any a priori reason to believe that having stores as perfectionist as Hollister will make money (strategy), but clearly someone likes them and has figured out how to make them en masse (execution).
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on June  8, 2012 #
 
A few people have written about evidence-based management; there may be a bit of overlap with what you want. http://openlibrary.org/books/OL3414690M/Hard_facts_dangerous_half-truths_and_total_nonsense by two of those people features less about quirky CEOs than most business books.
 
posted by Mike Linksvayer
 on June  8, 2012 #
 
I lost you somewhere, especially at how come no one else is curious about the details of their success?. Do you mean, how to build a functioning franchise? McDonalds, for example, has whole handbooks about the details. You can take classes in it at various service schools.
 
Youre hanging out too much with geeks, venture capitalists, professional blowhards, and high-class grifters 1/2 :-). This is NOT a mystery to people who actually work in service and retail.
 
And it is not effortlessly. Youre being misled by one of the cardinal rules of retail, which is dont show the customer what goes on behind the scenes. Theres a whole genre of expose about that.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on June  9, 2012 #
 
FYI
 
http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/fog0000000024.html
 
The other secret of Big Macs is that you can have an IQ that hovers somewhere between idiot and moron (to use the technical terms) and youll still be able to produce Big Macs that are exactly as unsurprising as all the other Big Macs in the world. Thats because McDonalds real secret sauce is its huge operations manual, describing in stunning detail the exact procedure that every franchisee must follow in creating a Big Mac. 
 
The rules have been carefully designed by reasonably intelligent people (back at McDonalds Hamburger University) so that dumdums can follow them just as well as smart people. In fact the rules include all kinds of failsafes, like bells that go off if you keep the fries in the oil too long, which were created to compensate for more than a little human frailty. There are stopwatches and timing systems everywhere. There is a system to make sure that the janitor checks if the bathrooms are clean every half hour. (Hint: theyre not.)
 
The system basically assumes that everybody will make a bunch of mistakes, but the burgers that come out will be, um, consistent, and youll always be asked if you want fries with that.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on June  9, 2012 #
 
See this New Inquiry article for one of the tools of perfection (spying on workers): http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/the-secret-shopper/
 
So change Perhaps a roving brand protection squad from perhaps to almost certainly.
 
How do they do it? And how come no one else is curious about the details of their success?
 
The New Inquiry article is evidence of curiosity about the details of their success.  Whole libraries of leftist literature are filled with the products of curiosity about the details of their success.  One might then ask why is there no concomitant desire to emulate their success  but the question answers itself.
 
posted by Yarrow
 on June 10, 2012 #
 
Get your head out the books and get out more, theres nothing special about Hollister, or the franchise process that produces clone after clone of the same boring cookie cutter store to sell to stupid kids who havent grown up and still think fashion is the most important thing in the world.  If you shop at Hollister, youre a sucker.
 
posted by Jim
 on June 13, 2012 #
 
We do a fair share of catastrophic accidents (think of airplane / boats crashes, industrial plant explosions, construction scaffold collapses, et cetera), and IMHO the best practice is to understand and accept the swiss cheese model:
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swiss_cheese_model
 
No one level should try to be perfect  if they try that, theyll just focus too much on perfection in little things while ignoring big things. Instead, multiple overlapping but distinct levels should be imposed so that failure can only occur if errors make their way through multiple levels.
 
One big problem weve noticed is when people are given roles that are too specific and are not encouraged to always maintain situational awareness about everything going on. How do 20 people all miss some extraordinary failure or hazard? Because each is focused entirely on a little piece. What you instead need are 20 people each of whom takes on big, overlapping chunks, and each is told to just look about them and find weak links or choke points or hazards, etc.
 
posted by Max Kennerly
 on June 19, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: April 19, 2012
 
Title: The 2011 Review of Books
 
Previously: 2010, 2009, 2008, 2007, 2006
 
2011 was a stressful year, in many ways, and so for large parts of it I did not really read. Instead, I tracked how many books I started and how many pages I got through each, for a total of 112 books started, 70 finished, and over 20,000 pages read. Not up to my usual standards. Nonetheless
 
Key: Books in bold are those that were so great my heart leaps at the chance to tell you about them even now. If you only have time to read some of this, read those.
 
The Net Delusion by Evgeny Morozov
 
Surprisingly well-written and well-researched.
 
Managing Oneself by Peter Drucker
 
The Halo Effect by Phil Rosenzweig
 
Last year, I recommended Good to Great, calling it actual science. Dave Bridgeland quickly corrected me and recommended this book, which is vastly better. Not only does it systematically debunk the pretensions to science in Good to Great and the other management bestsellers in an absolutely delightful manner, it provides a short but very thought-provoking discussion of strategy in its own right.
 
You can mock the banality of its recommendations, but theres no question: this book is well worth it just for the way it encourages habits of genuine scientific thought. I knew I never should have fallen so low as to trust a business book!
 
The Farnsworth Invention by Aaron Sorkin
 
Clearly not Sorkins best, but short and fun. Also interesting to see how Sorkin plays with the fourth wall in a play format.
 
The Trial by Franz Kafka (translated by Breon Mitchell)
 
A deep and magnificent work. Id not really read much Kafka before and had grown up led to believe that it was a paranoid and hyperbolic work, dystopian fiction in the style of George Orwell. Yet I read it and found it was precisely accurate  every single detail perfectly mirrored my own experience. This isnt fiction, but documentary.
 
Spoilers follow.
 
The bulk of the book is about K trying to find someone to fight his case for him, and failing miserably. As an individual in a world of bureaucracies, he concludes theres no substitute but to do the work himself.
 
This is set against the backdrop of his day job at the bank  about as characteristic a bureaucracy as you can imagine. The bank, by contrast, has no difficulty finding people to do its work for it. Even when K slacks off or gets distracted, the bank continues chugging along just fine  as seen in the vice president who leaps to take Ks work from him. (Compare: The independent lawyer is under no such pressure to actually get Ks work done.)
 
A vivid illustration that bureaucracies, once they get started, continue doing whatever mindless thing theyve been set up to do, regardless of whether the people in them particularly want to do it or whether its even a good idea. At the same time, individual people have an incredibly hard time executing long-term or large-scale tasks on their own, even when theyre quite motivated.
 
But what of the priest? The priest tells K a story about how as an individual in a bureaucracy, its a losing game to try to ask permission. You have to persuade your boss, your bosss boss, and your bosss bosss boss (so terribly powerful that your boss cant even bear to look at him). If you wait for your request to be approved by the chain of command, it wont happen at all.
 
K argues with the priest about how horribly unfair this is: isnt your boss (the individual) doing the wrong thing somehow? The priest maintains there are many different theories about this question of individual responsibility. But K is missing the larger point: this is just how bureaucracy works.
 
K takes the lesson to heart and decides to stop fighting the system and just live his life without asking for permission. It goes wellfor a while. But it still seems a better option than the alternatives.
 
The Great Stagnation by Tyler Cowen
 
A dreadful little book, which boils down to nothing more than a vast tract of economic illiteracy. Take just the insanity that is chapter 2. Cowen takes as his dictum:
 
The larger the role of government in the economy, the more the published figures for GDP growth are overstating improvements in our living standard.
 
For example, as government-insured health care takes up a larger proportion of our countrys spending, we cant accurately measure how our living standards are improving since its paid for at set rates by government instead of through a competitive market process to set accurate prices.
 
But, as any economist should realize, our standard of living is never appropriately measured through prices, because of consumer surplus. The whole point of a competitive economy is to create this disconnect. Lets say a chair greatly improves my standard of living and I would pay $10,000 for one. In a competitive market, different chair providers compete for my money by offering a lower price, eventually driving the price of the chair down to the cost of production.
 
Has my living standard [sic] thereby decreased? Of course not! In fact, it has increased since I can buy several chairs (while still getting thousands of dollars in consumer surplus!). Its insane to blame this on government.
 
Cowens other arguments are similarly ignorant. For example, he tries to claim that the reason were in a recession, not filling government coffers or supporting many families, is because our major innovations are sprining up in sectors where a lot of work is done by machines, not by human beings.  That is one reason why we have been seeing a jobless recovery. (L503)
 
Nonsense on stilts. The Federal Reserve decides how many people will have jobs, iPads have nothing to do with it.
 
This books popularity is a sad sign of how ignorance triumphs when it benefits the powerful.
 
Lifted by Evan Ratliff (iOS)
 
A fast, fun real-life heist story.
 
Getting Things Done by David Allen [reread]
 
Still good, though not worth starting a cult over. Its insights are more psychological than anything else.
 
Private Firms Working in the Public Interest by Abigail Bugbee Brown
 
Enron, WorldCom, Tyco, Olympus  why is there so much accounting fraud? Why isnt this stuff caught? In this serious but briskly-written work, Abigail Brown explains the incredible story of how accounting firms actually work. Paid by the people theyre supposed to be auditing, accounting firms have developed an elaborate culture of corruption, letting them aid and abet the most egregious forms of dishonesty.
 
(Disclosure: Ms. Brown and I were lab fellows together at the Harvard Center for Ethics.)
 
QED by Peter Parnell
 
Not bad, by any stretch, but on the page, for anyone whos familiar with Feynmans actual writings, this cant help but feel thin.
 
Although Of Course You End Up Becoming Yourself with David Foster Wallace
 
After a great artist dies, there comes a point where the barrel of work that can be published posthumously seems like its running dry (Elliot Smiths New Moon, Kafkas Office Papers). Publishing the transcript of a rambling conversation with DFW as a book would seem to be similarly stretching.
 
But, like the others, it turns out to be appreciated all the same. DFW is delightful and witty and its fascinating to see how much of his linguistic creativity and charm wasnt the result of any special effort but simply his natural form to speech. He must have been such a delight to spend time with.
 
The problem is that the editor of this volume, David Lipsky, is apparently a dreadful writer who is deluded into thinking hes a great one. Taking DFWs polite words of support as deep praise, he is not shy about sharing his gifts via overwrought introductions and interpolations. The result is an infuriating combination of glorious rants from DFW cut with ignorant and ill-written speculation by someone desperate to show off. (Though I dont recall Lipskys recent piece about DFW being so bad, so maybe he merely needed an editoror was told to pad the book out with random asides.)
 
Inside WikiLeaks by Daniel Domscheit-Berg
 
Brainiac by Ken Jennings
 
Who knew Ken Jennings was so funny? A witty and delightful book, though obviously not one thats anything more than trivial.
 
From Dictatorship to Democracy by Gene Sharp
 
A short but impressive guide to how to run a democratic revolution. Reportedly rather influential and certainly provides an interesting structure for thought.
 
Kingpin: How One Hacker Took Over the Billion-Dollar Cybercrime Underground by Kevin Poulsen
 
A fun and intriguing book. Poulsen writes in a restrained style, but the pace is fast and the images are vivid and the technology seems pretty right-on.
 
(Disclosure: Kevin Poulsen and I worked together at Wired.)
 
Diary of a Very Bad Year: Confessions of an Anonymous Hedge Fund Manager by Anonymous Hedge Fund Manager and Keith Gessen (with n+1)
 
An annotated transcript of a series of interviews between the brilliant literary writer Keith Gessen and a sympathetic and polymathic hedge fund manager. The hedge fund manager tries to provide some insight into what his world is like, in real time as its collapsing, but Gessens questioning typically isnt detailed enough to get a very vivid picture. HFMs stories were thrilling as things happened but with distance they seem somewhat blurred; its harder to fit them in now that we think we understand what happened. Theyre both delightful characters, though, enough to still make the book a decent read.
 
The Watchman: The Twisted Life and Crimes of Serial Hacker Kevin Poulsen by Jonathan Littman
 
Whatever ese you want to say about Kevin Poulsen, he was certainly funny. Littman provides a vivid retelling of his strange story. Im told Poulsen denies most of whats in this book, so it may not have much value as documentary, but as entertainment its pretty good.
 
Tourist Season by Carl Hiassen
 
Skinny Dip by Carl Hiassen
 
Carl Hiassen writes murder mysteries with a political bent. Theyre fun airport reading but its hard to justify them as much more than that.
 
Scoop by Evelyn Waugh
 
This book, the source of the name The Daily Beast, is a vicious satire of journalism. It has some quite witty and biting moments, including some Ive found myself referring back to, but Im not sure it holds together as literature.
 
The Age of WikiLeaks by Greg Mitchell
 
An good, well-written summary of the story so far, but nothing more than that.
 
JSTOR: A History by Roger C. Schonfeld
 
Team Rodent by Carl Hiassen
 
A very short book packed full of muck about the Disney Corporation. Fun stuff, but it comes off as very light  basically just a list of stories Hiassen seems to have picked up in his years of living nearby.
 
Shots by David Fenton
 
The Honor Code by K. Anthony Appiah
 
A collection of interesting stories about how social revolutions have happened. Appiah tries to tie them together with a story about honor, but I think thats ultimately less interesting and persuasive than just reading the stories themselves.
 
The Case of the Speluncean Explorers: Nine New Stories by Peter Suber
 
The Story of Colors by Subcomandante Marcos
 
Absurdly, a childrens book by Subcomandante Marcos. As weird as youd expect, but not as good as youd hope.
 
The New-York Historical Society: Lessons from One Nonprofits Long Struggle for Survival by Kevin Guthrie
 
A compellingly-written and fascinatingly-told story of how the New-York Historical Society, a grand old museum housing countless invaluable treasures, was so consistently financially mismanaged that despite its greatness it found itself constantly on the verge of financial ruin. Clearly written as a cautionary tale for those who would run a non-profit.
 
The Pale King by David Foster Wallace
 
In his notes, David Foster Wallace described this unfinished book about boredom as one where something big threatens to happen but doesnt actually happen. As a result, its probably less unfinished than it feels. It has the usual DFW virtuosity with language (including some truly poetic sections) and a tax-related premise that somehow captures the entirety of this political moment the same way Infinite Jest captured the cultural one, but theres certainly nothing in the way of a plot the way there was in Infinite Jest.
 
Bossypants by Tina Fey
 
This book is like a literary cupcake: a small bombshell of sugar without very much in the way of substance. I believe I read the whole thing while sitting in an airport terminal and while I enjoyed it and laughed, its hard to claim I took anything away from the experience.
 
Poor Economics by Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo
 
God, what a book! Poor Economics is a series of tales of foreigners trying to save the far-flung poor, while failing to realize not only that their developed-country ideas are terrible disasters in practice, but also that everything theyve learned to think of as solid  even something as simple as measuring distance  is far more fraught, and complex, and political than they ever could have imagined. Its a stunning feeling to have the basic building blocks of your world questioned and crumbled before you  and a powerful lesson in the value of self-skepticism for everyone whos trying to do something.
 
The Filter Bubble by Eli Pariser
 
The Psychopath Test by Jon Ronson
 
Another fun puff pastry of a book.
 
Empire State by Jason Shiga
 
Reads a bit like Shiga trying to do his own version of Shortcomings. Not a bad book, by any means, but it has none of the Jason Shiga magic.
 
Bookhunter by Jason Shiga
 
Words wont do it justice: an action-movie-thriller of a book, a hilarious adrenaline-fueled ride thats impossible to put down. Ive never had this much fun with a piece of entertainment. Just sheer delight.
 
Meanwhile by Jason Shiga
 
Not his best, but still entrancing and strange and very, very good.
 
Hes Just Not That Into You: The No-Excuses Truth to Understanding Guys by Greg Behrendt and Liz Tuccillo
 
Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality by Eliezer Yudkowsky
 
This is a book whose title still makes me laugh and yet it may just turn out to be one of the greatest books ever written. The writing is shockingly good, the plotting is some of the best in all of literature, and the stories are simply pure genius. I fear this book may never get the accolades it deserves, because its too hard to look past the silly name and publishing model, but I hope you, dear reader, are wiser than that! A must-read.
 
As it says at the beginning, you really need to give it a couple chapters to get started before passing judgment  the first bunch are quite silly and it doesnt seem worth sticking with until youve gotten past them.
 
In the Plex: How Google Thinks, Works, and Shapes Our Lives by Steven Levy
 
Levy again does what he does so well: make an alien culture visible and comprehensible. A great guide to Google.
 
(Disclosure: Levy once included me in an essay collection he edited.)
 
How to Count by Steven Frank
 
The first volume into what will surely be a wonderful introduction to programming. Certainly the best book on counting that Ive read.
 
The Inner Game of Tennis by Timothy Gallwey
 
This book touched me deeply and made me rethink the entire way I approached life; its about vastly more than just tennis. I cant really describe it, but I can recommend this video with Alan Kay and the author that will blow your mind.
 
The Fifth Discipline: The Art & Practice of The Learning Organization by Peter M. Senge
 
This book does not live up to its title  it has very little practical advice on how to create a learning organization  but still, its an important topic and I dont know of anything better. Its full of fascinating stories and provocations that will change how you think about business.
 
House of Holes by Nicholson Baker
 
Im not normally one for filthy books, but Bakers writing is so good that he somehow manages to make this one just utterly compelling despite the smut. I started reading and I couldnt stop, he just draws you into his world of pure insanity.
 
Rick Perry and his Eggheads by Sasha Issenberg
 
Sasha Issenberg is a miracle-worker. This book (really an excerpt from his forthcoming book) is so very, very good that it just blows me away. Issenberg tells the tale of everything Ive been trying to say to everyone in politics, but he does it in a real-life three-act morality play thats so good it could be a model on how to tell a story.
 
Haiti: After the Quake by Paul Farmer
 
Farmers gripping personal story of returning to Haiti after the earthquake and seeing the devastation it had left, both physically and politically. Its a personal narrative, not a work of investigative journalism, but it still provides powerful insight into what happened.
 
Confessions of a Rape Cop Juror by Patrick Kirkland
 
When I first heard that the rape cop had been acquitted, I took it as yet another instance of a rape culture in which crimes against women go unpunished. This book persuaded me that we were all wrong. Its a fascinating real-life story of what its like inside a jury room and what it really means to have proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
The End of Loser Liberalism by Dean Baker
 
Dean Baker knocks it out of the park again  a must-read for anyone who cares about economic policy.
 
The Lean Startup by Eric Ries
 
Ries presents a translation of the Toyota Production System to startups  and its so clearly the right way to run a startup that its hard to imagine how we got along before it. Unfortunately, the book has become so trendy that I find many people claiming to swear allegiance to it who clearly missed the point entirely. Read it with an open mind and let it challenge you, so you can start to understand how transformative it really is.
 
The Astonishing Secret of Awesome Man by Michael Chabon, illustrated by Jake Parker
 
A short childrens book with absolutely gorgeous illustrations by Parker and a cute little story by Chabon.
 
Harry Potter and the Sorcerors Stone (Book 1) by J. K. Rowling
 
Flat Earth News by Nick Davies
 
Ive read a lot of books of media criticism and they all tend to trod similar ground: sensationalism, political bias, etc., etc. Nick Davies has written what is, in many ways, the same book  except he write it as an insider, not an outsider. As a result, he explains how the media gets to be this way, why it is as bad as it is  and he tells lots of delicious insider stories of incredible things he discovered that got cut or buried or distorted beyond all recognition. Davies is now famous for bringing down the Murdoch empire, but if more people read this book, perhaps he will bring down the rest of corrupt journalism as well.
 
Steve Jobs by Walter Isaacson
 
Siracusa is right: they got the wrong guy. The book is compelling and readable, theres no doubt about that, but it tells a story thats basically already been told. Isaacson is so clueless and uncurious that pretty much all of his exclusive interviews were wasted; theres no insight in any of this, just weird lapses into authorial judgment.
 
Robert Caro has said theres one more biography he wants to write after he finishes LBJ. I dearly hope that its Steve Jobs.
 
Anything You Want by Derek Sivers
 
I constantly find myself loving Derek Sivers blog posts, and while they feel eerily insubstantial collected together here, theyre still full of enough insight and good humor to make them well worth reading.
 
CODE: The Hidden Language of Computer Hardware and Software by Charles Petzold
 
A magnificent achievement. Charles Petzold starts with the story of two kids across the street who wish to communicate with each other and, from this simple beginning, builds up an entire computer without ever making it seem like something that should be over your head. I never really felt I understood the computer until I read this book.
 
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (Book 3) by J. K. Rowling
 
Masscult and Midcult: Essays Against the American Grain by Dwight Macdonald (edited by John Summers), with an introduction by Louis Menand
 
Dwight Macdonald is one of those delightful cranks that you cant help but love watching. Summers has collected a magnificent listing of things to watch  plus included an introduction thats the incredible Menand at his best.
 
The Ghost [Writer] by Robert Harris
 
Its hard to shake the feeling that a big part of the appeal of this book is watching Tony Blair get arrested for war crimes, but that doesnt change the fact that its a first-rate political thriler.
 
What It Takes: The Way to the White House by Richard Ben Cramer
 
Were this just the story of how George H. W. Bush got elected, itd be one of the few biographies that belonged in the same league as Robert Caro. But its so much more than that: Richard Ben Cramer gives the same treatment to dozens of candidates in the 1988 presidential election: Gary Hart, Bob Dole, Joe Biden, Dick Gephardt, and on and on. Even if you didnt care about politics, this book would be worth reading simply because the writing is so good. But if you do, theres never been a better exposition of what drives these men who wish to be our leaders and what they have to go through to get there.
 
Joan: Forty Years of Life, Loss, and Friendship with Joan Didion by Sara Davidson
 
Its hard to shake the feeling that this book is merely the author attempting to cash in on their minor friendship with Joan Didion, but I love Didion so much that Im just grateful for the stories.
 
How a Book is Born: The Making of The Art of Fielding by Keith Gessen
 
Gessen is an incredible writer and here he has the gift of getting to observe, first-hand, a heartwarming tale. A good story and a great introduction to the modern book business.
 
Im Feeling Lucky: The Confessions of Google Employee Number 59 by Douglas Edwards
 
There were many, many times in this book that I couldnt help but wonder: How did he get away with writing this? Google apparently approved of the project and had chaperones in all his interviews, but nonetheless the book is just full of revelations and shockers that its hard to imagine Google would ever want to see the light of day.
 
There are a lot of books written about Google, but this has got to be one of the best. Edwards is uniquely suited to the task: his talents as a writer allow him to craft a compelling read, his insiders view of the very early days give him a detailed knowledge from which to tell his story, but his total lack of cultural chemistry with the rest of the Googlers allows him to find mysterious all the crazy things which they all take for granted. A fantastic read.
 
The Missionary Position: Mother Teresa in Theory and Practice by Christopher Hitchens
 
Mother Teresa is a byword for saintliness, but have you ever stopped to ask why? Christopher Hitchens makes a convincing case that shes something closer to a monster. Everyone Ive told about this book is shocked by the concept, but its a short book with a pretty compelling argument.
 
The Gated City by Ryan Avent
 
Books I Did Not Read This Year: An Ebook by Kieran Healy
 
Healy is hilarious; this collection of blog posts was a delight.
 
The Devil and Sherlock Holmes by David Grann
 
Grann is a masterful nonfiction writer; this is a collection of his pieces.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 19, 2012
 
Thank you.
 
Between you and Cosma I can nearly detach myself from the rest of the book chatterers.
 
posted by Russell L. Carter
 on April 19, 2012 #
 
Now that youve read The Inner Game of Tennis, the only big book that you havent read is Keith Johnstones Impro. I bet it has already been recommended to you. :-)
 
posted by Jarno Virtanen
 on April 20, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March  9, 2012
 
Title: How Python 3 Should Have Worked
 
As a workaday Python developer, its hard to shake the feeling that the Python 2 to 3 transition isnt working. I get occasional requests to make my libraries work in 3 but its far from clear how to and when I try to look it up I find all sorts of conflicting advice, none of which sounds very practical.
 
Indeed, when you see new 3.x versions rolling off the line and no one using them, its hard to shake the feeling that Python might die in this transition. How will we ever make it across the chasm?
 
It seems to me that in all the talk about Python 3000 being a new, radical, blue-sky vision of the future, we neglected the proven methods of getting there. In the Python 2 era, we had a clear method for adding language changes:
 
In Python 2.a, support for from __future__ import new_feature was added so you could use the new feature if you explicitly declared you wanted it.
 
In Python 2.b, support was added by default so you could just use it without the future declaration.
 
In Python 2.c, warnings begun being issued when you tried to use the old way, explaining you needed to change or your code would stop working.
 
In Python 2.d, it actually did stop working.
 
It seems to me this process worked pretty well. And I dont see why it couldnt work for the Python 3 transition. This would mean mainly just:
 
Putting this at the top of a file would declare it to be a Python3 file and allow the interpreter to parse it accordingly. (I realize behind the scenes this would mean a lot of work to merge tr 2 and 3 interpreters, but honestly it would always have been better to have a unified codebase to maintain.)
 
Then if I wanted my Python 2 program to use some 3 modules, I just need to make sure those modules have the import line at the top. If I want to do a new release of my module that works on Python 3, I just need to declare that it only works in Python 2.x and higher and release a version thats been run through 2to3 (with the new import statement). If my project is big, I can even port files to 3 one at a time, leaving the rest as 2 until someone gets around to fixing the rest. Most importantly, I can start porting to Puhon 3 without waiting for all my dependencies to do the same, parallelizing what until now has been a rather serial process.
 
Users know they can safely upgrade to 2.x since it wont break any existing code. Developers know everyone will eventually upgrade to 2.x so they can drop support for earlier versions. But since 2.x supports code that also runs in 3, they can start writing and releasing code thats future-compatible as well. Eventually the vast major code will work in 3 and users can upgrade to 3. (2.x will issue warnings to the remaining stragglers.) Finally, we can drop support for 2.x and all live happily having crossed the bridge together.
 
This isnt a radical idea. Its how Python upgrades have always worked. And unless we use it again, I dont see how were ever going to cross this chasm.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March  9, 2012
 
Hi Aaron,
 
Been a while, mate. Anyway I think one can accept your points as valid without despairing about crossing the chasm. The transition from Python 1.x to 2.x was similarly slow, and Im pretty sure 1.52 was still more heavily used by the time 2.2 emerged. I think the fact that it takes a while is actually a testament to Pythons success.
 
Uche
 
posted by Uche Ogbuji
 on March 10, 2012 #
 
Some of these thoughts have occurred to me as well recently, except Im a bit more pessimistic than you.  Ive debated writing a Pythons Dark Age? piece.  Its not just py3k, but pypy, and numpy+scipy that have me a bit gloomy with all the fragmentation of focus.   In some ways I think Py3K wasnt a big enough change if they were going to break backwards compatibility.  They should have added much more thorough functional programming underpinnings, etc..  Implementation wise, CPython is terrribly slow, especially when compared to Javascript these days, which, if anything, is even more dynamic than Python, and has been approaching C-like speeds with the new JITs.  And with cross-compiled languages like Coffeescript, even Pythons syntax is looking clunky in some ways.
 
PyPy is very promising but it is not numpy, scipy compatible, which are the main reasons I stick around in Python these days.  PyPy is also 2.7 compat. I believe, so Python 3K is truly sitting out there all alone.   Though I consider myself a Python guru, and use it quite a lot, there are a couple of other languages I would consider switching too for evertyhing if I could: CoffeeScript/JS + node, Lua + LuaJIT, Haskell, Mono C# even have you seen the awesome new async features being added to C#?  Sigh.
 
posted by Craig
 on March 10, 2012 #
 
Aaron, python will not die out because of 3x and i will explain why.  Im a senior in high school, i started coding 2 years ago on python and everybody suggested i start with 2.7 because there is no real community or books for 3x beginners yet.  I then read an article dated 1999! about the early adapters of 2x when 1.5 was being phased out.  It spoke about new coders or beginners being taught in 2x. How educational institutions, teaching blank slate students will give them a head start by early adapting 2x.guess what? thats exactly what happened, and who uses 1.5.2 now? that being said, 2x was backwards compatible with 1.5.2. The point is though, this year our compsci classes started coding in 3.2.2. a lot of teachers are starting to teach in 3.2.2. the younger guys are going to do the porting for popular 2x modules, its gonna take a little time but it will happen.  you will start to see a lot of people in a few years who never used 2x but are pro coders in 3x. plus the problem i had 2 years ago is no longer a problem, there are plenty of great beginners books and on-line tutorials available now for 3x.  dont get left behind buddy, adapt!
 
posted by Mike
 on March 11, 2012 #
 
I have no doubt that Python 3 will win the day in the end. It is taking a while but it is no Perl 6.
 
I am a huge fan of Mono as well and the async stuff is going to be great. You cab even use IronPython on Mono and just use C# with async/await where it makes sense. Or you can use F# for key parts. The ability to mix and match languages in a single codebase is one the great strengths of Mono.
 
posted by Justin
 on March 12, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: February 14, 2012
 
Title: When will experiences replace movie theaters?
 
When I was a kid, I remember my school putting on a production of Peter Pan. For the dramatic flying scenes, they rigged a special harness that would go under Pans costume and hoist him around the stage. But what I remember most is sitting outside the theater, desperately wishing it was me who got to fly. I knew I had a long life ahead of me, but when do grownups get to fly as if by magic?
 
The world is weirdly disappointing that way. Billions of dollars are spent making and watching people explore mysterious tunnels, chase down alleys, and fly as if by magic, but theres hardly a single opportunity to actually do any of these things.
 
I know of two exceptions. In Boston, there is a company called 5 Wits. The experience is something like this: you enter an unassuming rug shop and when the salesman asks if he can help you, you tell him the secret pass code. He gets a funny look on his face, locks the door and pulls down the blinds. He pulls back the rug to reveal a television screen that briefs you on your secret mission.
 
Once briefed, he shows you a concealed door where you tiptoe down to an underground passage way, only to find one of those arrays of laser-triggers, where you have to crawl underneath the lasers without setting them off. This leads to a whole underground lair, where you have to solve various puzzles to find the stolen plans, erase evidence of your intrusion, and disarm a bomb. Its enormous fun.
 
Its hard not to think this will be the future of in-person entertainment in the era of the Internet. Sure, movie companies are loading up on gimmicks like 3D to force people into theaters, but its hard to see that working in the long-term. No, we should embrace the trend  let the Internet distribute every movie ever made and free up these physical spaces to provide the kind of experience that you can only provide in an actual physical space.
 
I feel (have always felt) the same way about museums. Go to a local museum and look around  how much do you see that actually couldnt be provided by a website or a book? Thats why I was so excited to visit the City Museum in St. Louis.
 
In the dark days of St. Louis, when everyone with money had fled to the suburbs, an artist named Bob Cassilly bought a large abandoned shoe factory downtown. He and his friends begun using scraps and bargains to turn the place into a giant sculpture park. As you walk in, you enter the mouth of a giant whale, inside there are dozens of passage ways to crawl through and climb on, each filled with its own surprises and sculptures. Crawl down and youre led through a network of caves which spiral upward and upward until you find yourself atop a giant eight-story slide. As you slide down, picking up speed, you literally ride through a giant classical organ, playing music so loud it shakes you to your bones. And thats just the beginning.
 
The City Museum has been so successful, its led a renaissance of downtown St. Louis. Part of the building has been turned into offices and trendy lofts and the neighborhood now has some trendy restaurants and a shuttle. I flew to St. Louis just to visit it and I dont regret it one bit.
 
But I am mystified by why there arent more places like these. Theres definitely a universe where I work on building more. Instead we get bland amusement parks, pretentious performances like Punchdrunk, and dull museums and galleries. New York City worked itself into a tizzy when artist Carsten Holler exhibited a slide a quarter of the size of the one at the City Museum. Surely a city of that size can support a place like this of its own. What am I missing?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 14, 2012
 
I suspect youre missing the cost of (and trouble of finding!) amusement-park insurance.  Like circus insurance, its expensive in part due to its rarity.
 
posted by PJ
 on February 14, 2012 #
 
What didnt you like about Punchdrunk?
 
posted by Matt
 on February 14, 2012 #
 
Whoa, I love the 5 Wits description.
 
I organise urban adventures that have some affinity with what you discussed. When I started working on them I was in a crowd where people were bored all the time, and I figured we could come up with things to entertain ourselves. I hoped people would be inspired and make their own adventures.
 
That never happened, but I still enjoy planning adventures for people. Im hoping to create a Make Your Own Adventure framework to make it easier for non-programmers to organise these things. Ive long dreamed of traveling between cities and hosting adventures, and I just completed my first outside Canada last week in Tel Aviv.
 
I must not be the only one doing these things. You can see some of the sites for events Ive organised at the address I gave for site, though documentation isnt my fort and some of the sites are dead.
 
posted by Buck
 on February 14, 2012 #
 
Movies will never be replaced. Passive entertainment is a fundamental part to human mental conditioning.
 
posted by Rich
 on February 14, 2012 #
 
Having grown up all my life in St. Louis, Ive taken the City Museum for granted. It is a truly exceptional place!
 
I think the main reason places like this havent spread with the vigor you might have is that people people simply arent as interested in getting dirty doing physical tasks, no matter how satisfying or entertaining.
 
posted by glen elkins
 on February 14, 2012 #
 
Great stuff.  But movies have one thing that the solid experiences dont (yet) have  in seconds a completely new movie can be loaded.
 
Once youve done a physical experience a few times, it is no longer surprising.  The next movie can always be surprising.  Thats why people go to different vacation spots, different ski areas, etc.
 
The designers of the experiences will need to design in this kind of variability, and without making it just looking at a series of video screens.
 
When the full experience approaches the holodeck level, then.
 
posted by jp32
 on February 14, 2012 #
 
its a good point @jp32. an interesting idea would be to think about creating experiential games /urban adventures that compose with their local environment in space and time, such that they are inherently unpredictable and different each time through.
 
posted by jessykate
 on February 14, 2012 #
 
But Aaron, I love going to the movies. Ditto for museums. I believe a lot of people are like me, based on the crowds I see when I go to either of those venues. So, Ive got my doubts theyll be gone any time soon. I hope not!
 
Im also into more active experiences, like rock climbing and skiing. If you want to experience flying, try paragliding! It will knock your socks off, especially if you choose an interesting region.
 
Of course, such active experiences are substantially more risky and expensive than going to the movies. This may be why they arent as popular.
 
posted by Marya
 on February 14, 2012 #
 
The premise of the article is garbage as is the conclusion. First, the idea that movies need replacing is as ludicrous as paintings, photographs or books needing replacing. Each medium has its limitations, mystery and reward. For the forseeable future, an image of a painting on your screen will never be able to compete with the real thing. Ignoring the 3-dimensionality of a painting, there are limitations on things like size, resolution, and color gamut. At the Metropolitan Museum of Art, you can stand in the Temple of Dendur and touch it a structure built 2000 years ago. The environmental and tactile experience is like nothing you will get from a website or book.
 
The fact youre wondering when experiences are going to trump movies shows how devalued experiences already are for you. Things like hiking, camping, sailing, indoor skydiving, open mics, dinner parties and so on are still experiences regardless of whether they are constructed from fantasy. As for fantastical experiences, there have been war re-enactors, the SCA, ren faires, theme parks, laser tag, and haunted houses. Also the 826 stores have some of this element, the Superhero Supply Co,the Boring Store (absolutely NOT a spy store), time travel mart.
 
Im all for experiences like these and Sleep No More or Fuerza Bruta, but to approach them as some new replacement for consumptive media is nigh idiotic, because none of the previous examples seem to be showing anymore than faddish growth. Instead, the trend is for places like this to die the death of an over-elaborate mini-golf outlet.
 
posted by arparp
 on February 14, 2012 #
 
Wow, I hadnt heard of 5 Wits  very cool!
 
Red Frog Events in Chicago appears to be doing something similarish (they call it the active entertainment industry): http://www.redfrogevents.com/
 
posted by Adrian
 on February 15, 2012 #
 
Regarding Go to a local museum and look around  how much do you see that actually couldnt be provided by a website or a book?
 
Well, there are the resolution/color depth/3D issues. I suppose thatll be solved someday, but for now theres still a significant gap there.
 
Movies are social experiences also - dinner and a movie, and one could make a good argument that theaters have shrunk to that market from the experience qua movie.
 
After all, one could say What does a movie provide that couldnt be provided by a VCR tape or DVD and TV?. Obviously theres something there thats true to an extent sufficient to economically support an industry, even if not as much as during its glory days.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on February 16, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: December 14, 2011
 
Title: On Intellectual Dishonesty
 
Dishonesty has two parts: 1) saying something that is untrue, and 2) saying it with the intent to mislead the other person. You can have each without the other: you can be genuinely mistaken and thereby say something false without intending to mislead, and you can intentionally mislead someone without ever saying anything thats untrue. (The second is generally considered deceit, but not dishonesty.)
 
However, you can be intellectually dishonest without doing either of these things. Imagine that youre conducting an experiment and most of the time it comes out exactly the way you expect but one time it goes wrong (you probably just screwed up the measurements). Telling someone about your work, you say: Oh, it works just the way I expected  seven times it came out exactly right.
 
This isnt untrue and it isnt intentionally misleading  you really do believe it works the way you expected. But it is intellectually dishonest: intellectual honesty requires bending-over-backwards to provide any evidence that you might be wrong, even if youre convinced that you are right.
 
This is an impractical standard to apply to everyday life. A prospective employer asks you in a job interview if you can get to work on time. You say Yes, not I think so, but one time in 2003 the power went out and so my alarm didnt go off and I overslept. I dont think anyone considers this dishonesty; indeed, if you were intellectually honest all the time people would think you were pretty weird.
 
Science has a higher standard. Its not just between you and your employer, its a claim to posterity. And you might be wrong, but what if youre not around for posterity to call you up and ask you to show your work? Thats why intellectual honesty requires you show your work in advance, so that others can see if youre missing something.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 14, 2011
 
I genuinely liked this article. I cant say I loved it because its missing the word think in the last sentence of the second to last paragraph. :-)
 
posted by mal
 on December 14, 2011 #
 
Fixed, thanks.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 14, 2011 #
 
Does this mean that we can productively reframe intellectual honesty (which is largely a consequentialist construction about deceit) as intellectual humility (which is largely an epistemological construction)?
 
posted by 
 on December 14, 2011 #
 
Dishonesty has two parts: 1) saying that something that is untrue,
 
should read
 
saying something that is untrue
 
posted by drew
 on December 14, 2011 #
 
I try to be intellectually honest as much as possible. People think Im weird :-)
 
Paul.
 
posted by Paul W. Homer
 on December 14, 2011 #
 
if you were intellectually honest all the time people would think you were pretty weird.
 
That and tedious to converse with. ;)
 
posted by Scott B
 on December 14, 2011 #
 
One problem with reading over a hundred books a year is you forget which ideas are yours, and which you just read somewhere ;-)
 
From Feynmans Cargo Cult Science lecture (featured in Surely Youre Joking Mr. Feynman):
 
Im talking about a specific, extra type of integrity that is not lying, but bending over backwards to show how youre maybe wrong, [an integrity] that you ought to have when acting as a scientist.
 
posted by feynman
 on December 15, 2011 #
 
A really good example of this is Gregor Mendels data on trait inheritance in peas.
 
Im paraphrasing the history here, but the basic idea was that he crossed a number of true-breeding red pea plants with a number of true-breeding white pea plants and his genetic model required that he observe a strict 1:2:1 ratio of red:pink:white offspring.
 
Indeed, his recorded data show that ratio. The problem is that he didnt know anything about DNA or chromosomes and theres a phenomenon in chromosomal replication known as crossover, which is a mutation that allows for a slightly different, but statistically predictable change in that strict 1:2:1 radio.
 
Mendels data dont show the crossover effect.
 
Inescapable conclusion: Mendel faked his data!
 
He so badly wanted his observations to prove his overly-simplistic model that he lied to himself and to posterity. He covered up a fascinating inconsistency which would have pointed the way to the crossover effect in chromosome replication for later generations of scientists.
 
It is unfortunate for him that we can now definitively show that the father of Mendelian genetics gave into the temptation to be intellectually dishonest.
 
posted by anon
 on December 15, 2011 #
 
Perhaps the best expression of these, and related concepts, is in Bertrand Russells liberal decalogue;
 
posted by 
 on December 15, 2011 #
 
#9: I prefer John Stewart Mills prayer:
 
Lord, enlighten thou our enemies. Sharpen their wits, give acuteness to their perceptions, and consecutiveness and clearness to their reasoning powers: we are in danger from their folly, not from their wisdom; their weakness is what fills us with apprehension, not their strength
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 15, 2011 #
 
Nicely put. It is sort of defensive coding. Prepare for all the pitfalls first.
On the other hand, honesty in general is a burden these days. You are pretty much an outcast if you are straight with people!
 
posted by Pramod
 on December 17, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November  8, 2011
 
Title: Election Ballot 2011
 
Its like 2009 all over again.
 
Everyone seems to have moved to the middle since last time  the decent candidates have descended into vague blandness; the terrible have begun spouting the same rhetoric. But, fortunately, this time theres a candidate I actually quite like: Matt Nelson sounds awesome. Vote Matt Nelson.
 
School issues are inevitably depressing. Everyone says they oppose the achievement gap and so on, so, again, my first test was to see how people felt about standardized tests (ordered from opposition to support):
 
Happy Election Day!
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  8, 2011
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November  3, 2011
 
Title: Steve Jobs and the Founders Pain
 
After reading the new biography Steve Jobs, the person I most identify with is Jony Ive. Ive and Jobs became close friends and collaborators, but Ive, so instinctively nice, found himself puzzled about how his good friend could be so mean:
 
Hes a very, very sensitive guy. Thats one of the things that makes his antisocial behavior, his rudeness, so unconscionable. I can understand why people who are thick-skinned and unfeeling can be rude, but not sensitive people. [And] because of how very sensitive he is, he knows exactly how to efficiently and effectively hurt someone. And he does do that. (462)
 
Steves fits are legendary. He would shout at a meeting, You asshole, you never do anything right, recalls his director of finance, Debi Coleman. It was like an hourly occurrence. (124) This is shit! he yelled after seeing the first draft of the Heres to the crazy ones ad. Its advertising agency shit and I hate it. (329)
 
Something was either the best thing ever, or it was shitty, brain-dead, inedible. Any perceived flaw could set off a rant. The finish on a piece of metal, the curve on the head of a screw, the shade of blue on a box, the intuitiveness of a navigation screenhe would declare them to completely suck until that moment when he suddenly pronounced them absolutely perfect. (561)
 
One way of reading this is that Steve Jobs is just a sociopath, someone who knows exactly where peoples weaknesses are and plays on them masterfully until they do exactly, precisely what he wants, without little concern about human consequences.
 
But theres another, more sympathetic reading. I think Jobs really did feel this way. He had such an intense aesthetic sense that even something as minor as the curve on the head of the screw could cause him enormous pain. And, like anyone in pain, he responded by lashing out at the people around him. There are some people who, when theyre insulted, cant resist punching the person who insulted them. Steve wasnt much for physical violence, but when something looked off to him, he couldnt help screaming.
 
I sympathize because I can see this in myself. Something thats perfect just feels much, much better than something thats almost right. When Im doing something myself, I can just sit there and work at it until its exactly right. Its embarrassing to launch a product with a bug in it! It physically hurts when I realize thats what Ive done. But as projects and companies grow, there are more and more people in between me and those tiny details. And then I face a choice: do I keep complaining until somethings perfect or do I just let go and consider it somebody elses problem?
 
Steve never let go. He continued to feel that founders pain about everything in his life. When it was his project, hed make people stay late until they got it right. When it was his company, hed go right to the person responsible, even if they were 5 levels down in the org chart, and make them fix it. (After looking at a bunch of screenshots, Jobs jumped up, grabbed a marker, and drew a simple rectangle on a whiteboard. Heres the new application, he said. Its got one window. You drag your video into the window. Then you click the button that says Burn. Thats it. (382))
 
In fact, it didnt matter whose company it was. He once sent his fresh-squeezed juice back to the kitchen three times in a row until they got it right (527); when his cable box was frustrating him, he called the CEO of Comcast. (I thought he was calling to say something nice about it, the CEO recalled. Instead, he told me It sucks. (489))
 
And thats why I like Jony Ive. He too clearly feels that pain (he once insisted they hold up an entire product launch because he didnt like the polish on the screws) but he doesnt lash out at people about it. Instead, he sits down with the people involved and works to fix the problem until they get it just right.
 
Ask Jobs about his viciousness and he insisted it was all for the best: Ive learned over the years that when you have really good people you dont have to baby themA-plus players like to work together, and they dont like it if you tolerate B work. Ask any member of that Mac team. They will tell you it was worth the pain. Even Debi Coleman agreed: I consider myself the absolute luckiest person in the world to have worked with him.
 
But does it require so much pain? My hope is that I can be just as exacting, demand work just as good, without emotionally destroying people in the process. I want to be a perfectionist and a nice guy. I want to be Jony Ive. I hope it works  for my sake, and Apples.
 
Thanks to Ben Wikler for suggesting this post.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  3, 2011
 
I should be clear I dont know Jony Ive; Im just describing his character in the book. If he annoys people in real life, Id love to hear the details.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November  3, 2011 #
 
Steve Jobs is bullshit then. Thats immature and psycho. I respect obsessive compulsiveness directed at making something really remarkable. Using that as an excuse to shout at people and insult them is awful, ugly and infantile.
 
The kind of person we associate most with this kind of behaviour is a star. A diva. Not a perfectionist. Naomi Campbell.
 
posted by bradbell.tv
 on November  4, 2011 #
 
Excuses for Jobs behaviour skirt very close to a kind of vulgarisation of Nietzsches Ubermensch idea. As if Jobs was such a genius (so very thenthetive to beauty!) that normal human standards dont apply. I realise that s not quite what youre saying (as youre holding up Ives as a better example), but its close.
 
Maybe its more plausible to suggest that Jobs was an example of a person who had too much success, too early, and as a consequence never quite grew up? A (saner and more talented) translation of Michael Jackson to the business world.
 
Behaving with compassion towards others is a requirement for all, not an annoying limitation to be ducked as soon as your wealth and/or power allow. Jobs, supposedly a Buddhist, surely should have understood that.
 
posted by Cris Bennett
 on November  4, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November  3, 2011
 
Title: Apple and the Kindle
 
The Amazon Kindle is full of all sorts of amazing, delightful touches  the sort of thing youd expect from an Apple product. For example, when you first take your Kindle out of its (gorgeous!) box, it boots right up knowing your name and logged into your account. This is actually out-Apple-ing Apple: its possible because Amazon not only controls the hardware and the software, but the entire distribution channel; they know exactly who is going to get each Kindle.
 
And think about how the original Kindle came with a lifetime unlimited worldwide data plan. Imagine how much that must have cost! All so that you never had to think about syncing again: your Kindle was automatically synced, no matter where it was in the world.
 
Bezos must have spent tons of energy getting this stuff right. And he must be sitting there, pissed, that Steve Jobs gets all these laurels while no one ever recognizes the stuff hes done. But I dont think thats because Jobs is a better marketer and showman than Bezos (thats the easy way out); its because the small details that delight get buried under small details that annoy.
 
For example, if you download a sample of a book and get to the end and decide to purchase the whole thing, the sample doesnt expand to download the remainder of the book  instead the full book downloads completely separately and you have to manually copy over all your highlights and annotations to the full one. (You cant just keep them in the sample because samples dont even sync; you have to download a sample manually to each of your devices and hand-synchronize the page numbers.)
 
Or (and this is incredibly aggravating) when you select a word in the Kindle, depending on how common a word it is, the option that comes up highlighted by default is either full definition or start highlight. Since e-inks refresh rate is so slow, you typically dont see whats actually come up until youve pressed the button for the second time. So I often double click on words to highlight them, but some percentage of the time this kicks me over into the dictionary and I have to hit back twice to get out.
 
And this is all before Ive even got to the disastrous incompatibilities between the Kindle device, the Kindle for Mac app, the Kindle for iOS app, the Kindle Online Reader (read.amazon.com), and the kindle.amazon.com social network  all of which are full of gruesome interface annoyances of their own.
 
Thats the thing about delightful details: theyre not just another thing you can add on top. Unless you sweat the details all the way through the user experience, the ones that delight quickly get drowned out by the ones that constantly annoy. I hope someone at Amazon will take that to heart.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  3, 2011
 
The original Kindle did not come with a free lifetime unlimited worldwide data plan. Syncing in Canada was something like one dollar per book.
 
posted by Daniel Lemire
 on November  3, 2011 #
 
I couldnt agree with you more on this, Aaron. As iTunes continues to become even more of a juggernaut it will be interesting to see if the Apple content experience continues to be as seamless and intuitive as possible.
 
posted by Philip Downer
 on November  3, 2011 #
 
Oh man music to my ears, that full definition or start highlight issue is honestly beyond belief but the device is full of such issues. As you say its useless having beautiful hardware and a great package if the software is so frustrating to use.
 
Im hopeful Apple will bring out an e-reader or somehow add that functionality to an update to one of their devices (assuming the dual mode screens exist by then). Theyre already ahead of the game in terms of iCloud, e.g. if I buy a book from the publisher and import it into my iPod and iPad then highlights synch between the two
 
posted by Colin Jack
 on November  3, 2011 #
 
My small annoyance with the Kindle is when I havent picked it up in a while, and I try to scroll the page by dragging my finger across the screen. I guess I subconsciously expect anything flat and smaller than a laptop to behave somewhat like my phone.
 
posted by cmars
 on November  3, 2011 #
 
I work within Amazon and Ill make sure this message is passed along to someone who can do something about it.
 
posted by Random Amazonian
 on November  3, 2011 #
 
Thanks. I have other complaints if you want them. :-) Email me@aaronsw.com.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November  3, 2011 #
 
I think the main difference is that the Kindle used a bunch of old products repackaged in a new format, instead of improving that format. The original ebook standard for the Kindle was based on a Palm reading format. It sucked then and it sucks now for formatting (lots of little things, like having to manually put in hard right spaces to get the paragraphs to format correctly etc) which costs money and time to fix. Im extremely interested to see how the new format works out, except of course, its incompatible with all the earlier Kindles, and everything currently shipping except the Kindle Fire. A bit disappointing that.
 
One other point. If you can afford to spend as much money as Amazon is spending on this (and it includes trying to do whats happened in classified ads in print, turn a multibillion industry into  in a multimillion industry to the content providers, publishers in this instance, whose profits are failing because Amazon is forcing the cost to the user to a unsustainable level), it better work.
 
posted by Paul
 on November  3, 2011 #
 
Ive had the Kindle for over half a year and I couldnt be more pleased with it.  I do agree that the not tying together of the sample and the full download is a bit annoying.
 
posted by Emile Baizel
 on November  4, 2011 #
 
except of course, its incompatible with all the earlier Kindles, and everything currently shipping except the Kindle Fire.
 
I believe they announced that the latest generation of Kindles would also get support for the new format.l
 
posted by Matthew Wilson
 on November  4, 2011 #
 
What I am missing most about the Kindle (especially in comparison to Apple products) is the dedication to great typography! I mean - this is a dedicated e-READER - why doesnt Amazon spend a few millions on getting typography right - e.g ligatures.
I dont get it - in this regards its well behind Apple.
 
posted by Tom
 on November  4, 2011 #
 
I have been pleased with all my Apple and Kindle products, and have found annoyances in both. I do wonder about the comment about Amazon harming comment providers. If they can print and ship a product and sell it for $12 at a profit, why cant they sell it electronically for $9 and still make money. I know that printing is a small part of the cost, but eliminating shipping and inventory risk has got to be significant. The industry has hardly changed since Gutenberg.
 
Dont get me started on audio books, which have zero marginal cost.
 
posted by Brock
 on November  4, 2011 #
 
Or clicking on an endnote marker takes you to the endnotes, which then become the latest read position in the book, making sync worse than useless.
 
posted by rsc
 on November  4, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November  1, 2011
 
Title: Revolutions on the Internet
 
I hate to wade into such a sterile debate as whether social media helps revolutions, but I made a point about it recently at a conference and people seemed to like it, so I thought Id put it up here for posterity.
 
Jon Elster has a four-phase theory of revolutions:1
 
A hard-core of committed activists get together to do something completely crazy.
 
The regime cracks down, attracting people who are sympathetic to the cause to rally to the support of the crazy ones.
 
As the protests grow, it seems like they might have a reasonable chance of succeeding and it seems worth it even for just normal reasonable people to start joining in.
 
The protests become so overwhelmingly large that even their opponents pretend to be part of them, so as not to be on the wrong side of history.
 
It seems pretty clear that the Internet helps with 1  after all, its brought together groups of crazy committed people about every other topic, from Smallville slash fiction to high-energy astrophysics. Itd be very surprising if it didnt bring committed activists together too.
 
Its clearly helped with 2  YouTube videos of protestors being mistreated by police have been a staple of the #occupy movement, even though they havent gotten much coverage on traditional TV; We are all Khaled Said presumably reached some people in Egypt.
 
3 and 4 are when the cable news and satellite television stations start joining in and when people support the protest just because its such a huge physical presence in their lives. Here, I agree, the Internet probably has less effect.
 
The problem is that you never get to 3 and 4 without 1 and 2  I dont think its a total accident that all of these protests are happening now. I think theyre happening because 1 and 2 have been made much easier thanks to the Internet. Its just that most people dont hear about them until steps 3 and 4, which are carried much more by traditional media. They suffer from the understandable fallacy that just because they heard about it on TV, that must be how everyone else did.
 
Outlined in the preface to his book Political Psychology (Cambridge; 1993).
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  1, 2011
 
Sorry, Aaron, I am thoroughly unconvinced.
 
This is a great example of coming up with an appealing story which plays on preconceptions and cant be disproved, so the audience will love it. Kind of like evolutionary psychology 1/2 :-).
 
The logic leap is right here:
 
It seems pretty clear that the Internet helps with 1   Itd be very surprising if it didnt bring committed activists together too.
 
Thats on the level of It seems pretty clear this is about competition for the best mates. After all, so much else is, so itd be very surprising if this isnt too..
 
Note - this is a short blog comment. I am not writing a book one comment at at time about this - the Internet isnt helping me with that either :-(.
(i.e. The Internet should help you get a book deal. After all, its helped so many people get book deals.).
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on November  2, 2011 #
 
I think youre correct.  Timur Kurans research on preference falsification and unanticipated revolutions was strangely prescient of the Arab spring, and evidences roughly the model Elster was talking about.
 
OTOH, I think Evgeny Morozov is one of the smarter people on this topic today, especially from some firsthand experience I have had with some of these regimes.  Internet worked to support revolution in countries like Egypt because of the incompetence of the authorities.  Syria is much smarter, and Russia is the world champion of using the Internet to repress dissent.
 
posted by Joshua Allen
 on November  2, 2011 #
 
Regarding #4:  Even Brookings wont gripe about Occupy Capitol Hill  http://www.brookings.edu/events/2011/1207_occupy_congress_chat.aspx
 
posted by Pablo
 on December  7, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September  4, 2011
 
Title: A Better Travel Guide for Geeks
 
Pretty much anywhere you go, you can find some pretty scenery, a charming hotel, some decent restaurants, a couple of interesting museums. And the goal of most travel guides seems to be to tell you about these things. The result is a rather boring sort of tourism in which everywhere feels pretty much like everywhere else.
 
What I want is a travel guide that highlights the things that are absolutely different about this place than anywhere else you might go  the things you cant see anywhere else. For my hometown of Cambridge, it might be the window displays on Main St. that explain how to sequence DNA, or the architectural marvels of Stata, BCS, and Simmons. In Boston, maybe its the Athenum or the Globe factory tour. In West Virginia, maybe its going to see mountaintop removal or some back-to-the-land communes.
 
And maybe the right thing to do is to head somewhere else. Normal guidebooks are separated out by city and state, so if the coolest thing in Boston is actually to commute up to Providence, youd never hear about it. But youd put this guidebook on the Internet, so youd give it your location and itd tell you what was awesome nearby no matter what political jurisdiction it happened to be in.
 
Anyone know anything like that?
 
Related things: Ben Goldacres list of Nerdy Day Trips in the UK. jgcs Geek Atlas lists cool science and technology places. Atlas Obscura lists curiosities. WikiTravel lets you add places of your own. Im told Lonely Planet has some stuff like this. Smile When Youre Lying is an amusing account of the distortionary forces on the average travel guide.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September  4, 2011
 
A website I built (years ago, using web.py) - http://traveldk.com/ - gives users the tools to build custom travel guides. Maybe that would be a good place to start? I can contribute some info for the UK and Palestine.
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on September  4, 2011 #
 
Hi, maybe you like Mediamatic Travel (http://travel.mediamatic.net/). They have their focus on the things that you dont read in the tourist books.
 
The Mediamatic Travel website acts as a network of cultural professionals from all over the world. It provides an open platform where they can exchange information about the unseen or underground culture in their city. Things you normally wont find in your average travel agency.
 
posted by Lode Claassen
 on September  4, 2011 #
 
GeoCashing for travel activities.
 
posted by Mark Whiting
 on September  5, 2011 #
 
I would ask on http://travel.stackexchange.com (kinda StackOverflow for travelers).
 
http://travel.stackexchange.com/questions/1411/what-are-more-authentic-places-in-london-as-opposed-to-the-ones-overcrowded-with
 
Not the guides, but again, you can ask people there about the guides.
 
posted by Dan Abramov
 on September 10, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 22, 2011
 
Title: What Does Google Mean by Evil?
 
Pretty much ever since Paul Buchheit suggested Dont be evil as a corporate values statement (and Amit Patel begun writing it on whiteboards around the office), any time Google does something people dont like, they begin calling it evil and complaining that Google is violating its prime directive.
 
But surely evil means something more than just wrong or bad. If the girl across the street peers through your window to watch you undress, we might say that was bad and wrong and awful, but I dont think anyone would try to claim it was evil. Evil is a really strong term!
 
Now part of the joke is that Google seems to be using it rather loosely. If you look at their examples of evil deeds, they seem rather mundane compared to cackling supervillains and mass murderers. They specifically name three: showing irrelevant ads, using pop-ups or other annoying gimmicks, and selling off actual search results.
 
Hardly the stuff of comic books. But what do these three have in common? Theyre all instances of refusing to make things worse for your users in order to make more money. Perhaps that still seems like a mundane conception of evil, but I think it gets at something important. Evil isnt just about doing terrible things  its about doing terrible things for bad reasons. The evil villain cackles and brags about how theyre on the side of evil  they explicitly oppose doing good. And this definition of evil is all about that: if youre working against your own users, you must have crossed the line and joined the other side.
 
When you stop to think about it, its wild how many companies have done just that: Printer manufacturers who put chips on their ink cartridges, so you cant refill or recycle them but instead have to buy a new full-price cartridge. Apple preventing the Kindle app from having any sort of ebook buying functionality. Web publishers who break articles up into 20 pages so that you have to load 20 different ads just to read one article. These are pretty banal evils, but its striking that I cant think of any example where Google has done anything like that. (Perhaps someone will name one Ive missed in the comments.)
 
There are lots of things I disagree with Google about  the most recent being their refusal to let my friends with chosen names use Google+  but those things arent evil by this definition. For example, Google defends their real names policy by saying itll lead to better conversations. They still claim to be fighting for the user.
 
So if you want to argue with Google, thats the way to do it: dont say that theyre hurting someone out there in the world or violating some rule or principle, say that what theyre doing isnt serving their users. Because thats the line Googles afraid to cross.
 
Thanks to Kragen Sitaker for discussions that inspired this post.
 
UPDATE: Chris Soghoian observes Google refuses to add Do-Not-Track support to its browsers or servers in order to maximize ad profits. Scott Teresi suggests Googles refusal to provide customer support (in order to save money) qualifies. Tom Slee reminds me of their infamous net neutrality deal with Verizon. John Gruber argues that having ads at all is evil in this sense. Mark Heath points to those infuriating YouTube ads.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 22, 2011
 
One evil thing is the deployment of DRM on videos; first on Google Video some years ago, now on premium YouTube video; and also in the Android platform. Theres no customer case for this  its purely about increasing revenue while making things worse for customers.
 
posted by Cory Doctorow
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Cory: Not to derail Aarons argument, but even YouTube DRM has a user justification: without it, their partners wouldnt allow videos for rent at all. Seems to me that YouTubes made great efforts in open video in recent years, whenever the brain-dead studios arent involved  the move to HTML5 video, DRM-free downloads for user-uploaded videos, CC-licensing, and web-based video remixing for CC-licensed video all come to mind.
 
posted by Andy Baio
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Google collects vast amounts of data on its often unwitting users (and non-users in some cases: http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/16/technology/16google.html) and has resisted attempts by governments to cut back on this practice.
 
posted by Jon C
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
But has Google ever defended this data collection on any grounds other than how it lets them make better products?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Isnt making better products just about generating more shareholder value, at least for a massive publicly traded company? But beyond that, why would we limit ourselves to a companys self-serving definition of evil? Breaking up articles into multiple pageviews is annoying, but I dont know of any actually-held conception of morality that calls that evil while giving a pass to the unrestricted collection of users data.
 
posted by Jon C
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Let me clarify a bit: obviously, users who dont want their data being collected dont think Google is serving them by doing so. Google could come back and say but this is what makes our products great, youre just being short-sighted. Whats the difference between that and genericwebsite.com saying we know its annoying to click through 20 pages to read an article, but this is what allows us to pay our writers well and deliver great content? Besides, of course, that one involves a trivial annoyance and the other has potentially huge stakes.
 
posted by Jon C
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Aaron,
 
Your app store example is technically out of date - they lifted the same price restriction in June, but kept the restriction that you not link out to a web site - thats why Amazon had to release a new kindle app with no store (and followed up with the HTML5 reader.
 
http://www.macrumors.com/2011/06/09/apple-reverses-course-on-in-app-subscriptions/
 
Regardless, I think it does fit your idea of evil equating with not compromising your users experience just for money.
 
posted by Ted M
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Googles refusal to add Do Not Track support to its browser (it is the only major browser to not support this header) seems to be pretty evil.
 
The company doesnt want to add support to chrome, because it would then have a tougher time defending its position of not respecting the header on the advertising network side of the business.
 
Googles DC policy team is at least quite honest about this when you ask them. They admit that their lack of DNT support in Chrome is directly linked to the fact that the more people who enable the feature, the less money made by their behavioral advertising business.
 
posted by Chris Soghoian
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Redefining evil to be isnt serving their users is automatically ceding Google the rhetorical high ground. Because then Google reaps the benefit of the broad moral connotations, but can turn around and justify it by very narrow business discussions.
 
For a similar idea, I dont think youre very supportive of the idea of copyrights promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts clause being interpreted as serving the copyright holders, via anything which increases their power and profits thus being deemed to promote the Progress.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
I second the privacy issue. To put 99% of development time into finding ingenious ways to use customer data and 1% into allowing users to see what data is used and have control over it, strikes me as anti-customer. (So glad to see the Google Dashboard being expanded, though.)
 
I would also add Googles lack of customer service as an evil. Perhaps too many people rely on Googles products, with no tech support or customer service for them. I know someone who had their Google Sites removed because Google thought his personal list of links was part of a link farm. There was no way to contest this. Eventually he found a major developer of Google Sites and sent him a direct message over Twitter. He got no response, but his pages were restored. Im sure there are many similar stories across the Google product line, many affecting people not so lucky.
 
Google has boldly put itself in control of millions of peoples data and yet wants to dodge its responsibility when it comes to fulfilling the full spirit of those services. I can understand not wanting to provide tech support for a free product, but to not be evil (psychopathic?) about deleting peoples data, there should be some recourse for mistakes. For instance a paid tier or per-ticket fee, for those affected by inevitable issues with Googles systems.
 
posted by Scott Teresi
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
I have no doubt that there are still people at Google that truly believe in Dont Be Evil, but the company is so huge now that I think that there are a lot more people who only care about their own careers and money. Im reminded of a comment I read recently from someone claiming to be a former Google employee who resigned, and asked (in what amounted to) his exit interview what ever happened to Dont Be Evil. His former boss asked him, What are you, twelve years old?
 
There appears to be a struggle between those that believe the first priority should be Googles mission, to organize the worlds information and make it universally accessible and useful, and those that believe the company is still really just an advertising company.
 
What we need to worry about is not only who, if anyone, will win that struggle, but how many blunders will be made along the way by those that are more concerned about the money.
 
posted by Mike
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Seth: As I tried to make clear at the end, my goal in the piece was understanding what Google meant by evil so that people arguing with them could be maximally persuasive. I didnt mean to mean to suggest people should cede the rhetorical high ground in general.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Thanks, Ted M. Ive corrected it. The previous text read:
 
Apples requirement that companies not let users buy ebooks through through any non-Apple iOS applications.[^f]
 
Apple doesnt require this directly, but instead makes it impossible to do anything else. You have to give Apple a 30% cut of anything sold through an iOS app. But the makers of iOS ebook apps dont make enough to do that: they owe more than 70% of the price to the publisher. You might think they could just raise the price by 30% for iOS users, but Apple also prohibits them from selling ebooks at a higher price within the app than they do outside.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
So youre claiming Apple should let a direct competitor (Amazon) park a free app on Apples App Store (which Apple has invested in, maintains, promotes, etc), leach its traffic and divert potential customers to another site (Amazon.com) where Apple gets no revenue? Why would Apple do that?
 
If a third party (Amazon) thinks 30% cut is too much, they shouldnt be on the App Store. Why should this make Apple evil?
 
posted by Kontra
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Id actually argue that not implementing do-not-track is, from Googles perspective, acting in the users best interests.
 
Heres how the argument goes: the web runs on ads. Ads can either be irrelevant, or relevant. Irrelevant ads waste the time of the user, and the money of the advertiser. Theyre useless to the user. Relevant ads, on the other hand, are actually useful to the user - being delivered a good offer or product at the right time, when youre actually interested in that product category, is useful.
 
Hence, do-not-track, which prevents Google and others making ads more relevant (and thus useful) are user-hostile.
 
Im not saying that I think that argument is right, but I think its a rational argument - and a consistent one with dont be evil.
 
posted by Ian Betteridge
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Here is an example of evil in the Google sense.
 
I was following a Google CM on Google+. I spotted a very long comment to one of her posts that was critical of Google+. Because the comment was so long, I failed to scroll up to see the original post. I replied to the comment with a brief defense of Google+ and so did someone else.
 
The Google CM tagged the three of us and replied, I left the comments available on this post to discuss [redacted]. I did not leave it open to a broad discussion about Google+. Thus, I am going to delete the off-topic comments made here. Please refrain from doing this to anyone in the future.
 
I did not mind the comments being deleted, but I thought the final sentence was heavy-handed.
 
I think such behavior is contrary to Dont be evil because it is an abuse of her status and power as an official Googler. She is being paid (well paid, I assume) to model good manners for the community.
 
However, everyone has a bad day from time to time, and everyone has errors in judgement.
 
posted by Dopey Dumhead
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
As I tried to make clear at the end, my goal in the piece was understanding what Google meant by evil so that people arguing with them could be maximally persuasive. [do you have a quote tag?]
 
Why look at the slogan as anything more than a marketing gimmick? If their use of evil had an exact meaning, theyd tell us. I would think that the maximally persuasive way to argue with them (Google is not going to argue with you) or to the public is to appeal to shared notions of right and wrong.
 
Trying to decipher a meaning from a vague corporate slogan and then arguing it on those terms seems counterproductive.
 
posted by Jon C
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
I like to add possible additions for Google being evil in your definition.
 
 Google Sidewiki. Here, in essence, Google hijacks comments from site owners, with NO OPTION FOR SITE OWNERS TO OPT IT OUT.
 
 Another issue i possibly see as Google Evil , is that Google kept giving out SEO advices, in particular the evolution of the nofollow tag. From Googles perspective, it is helpful for the health of web. In my cynical perspective, it is a way to increase the SEO/spam war escalation, with desired consequence of increasing online ads, and resulting in more spam and todays content farm. So, in this view, Google intentionally fostered the whole SEO market knowning it will increase ads on the web, albeit without any behavior to specifically favor sites that use Google ad service. (More detail here: Googles nofollow Rule and Why Does Google Give SEO Advice?.)
 
I wrote out detail here: Google: Dont Be Evil vs Dont Do Evil http://xahlee.org/w/Google_dont_be_evil_dont_do_evil.html
 
posted by Xah Lee
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Seth has a point, but I do like the goal of exploring what Google meant by evil: its not  the only exercise one should take, of course, but its a useful one.
 
That said, I think Andy Baio goes one step too far in letting Google off with without it, their partners wouldnt allow videos for rent at all.
 
The my partner/competitor made me do it argument was one they made over patents recently as well, of course. Microsoft is evil for going after Nortel patents; Google is just doing what it has to to minimize the effects of Microsofts evilness. To me, this good guys/bad guys narrative is a juvenile idea of how evil works.
 
An instance that qualifies for me is the Google/Verizon 2010 proposal of abandoning net neutrality over wireless networks. Of course, Google argues that the carriers made me do it and they are only trying to minimize the impact of carrier traffic discrimination but, again, thats how evil works.
 
posted by tomslee
 on August 22, 2011 #
 
Aaron, 
you are naive, at best. Playing with words doesnt get to the core of this. What did G mean originally by evil? Was it to do the right thing or not be evillike Hitler or Charles Manson? So saying that Google might be a greedy and scummy monopolist but not evil helps Google how?
 
EVERYTHING google does is to make money, including favoring their advertisers in SERPS. They call them brands and to be one in e-commerce you need to spend money advertising on Google properties, lots of it too. Just because Google says its for the users doesnt make it so.
 
posted by Skyhook
 on August 23, 2011 #
 
The last comment reminds me that another example is when Google forced Motorola and Samsung to take Skyhook off their phones. Googles reasoning was flimsy, transparently self-serving, and disingenuous.
 
posted by mealworm
 on August 23, 2011 #
 
There are plenty of situations where Google behavior is more or less evil in the sense you are using. 
Usually when you search for anything, the first positions - where users really click - are for YouTube videos, Google Shopping products or Maps of themselves. They even copy Yelp reviews and offer them as relevant search results.
 
As long as Google always thinks or present their own products as the more relevant results for search results, they are failing to be democratic or really meritocratic.
 
It is also quite cynic to say we would never show paid ads between the results when they show their own pages among them (not among, but on top of them). It is like saying I will never sell car from others when you have your own car selling company.
 
My bad English is not my native language, I hope the ideas get clear enough.
 
posted by pacob
 on August 23, 2011 #
 
What about blocking access to services like emails (years worth of emails) and contacts and basically your entire digital life (if you rely that much on Google services) to certain individuals because they didnt use their real name, or were believed to impersonate celebrities?
 
Is that not considered one such act of evil where they went more than long ways to make things worse to some of their consumers, arguably in the name of identity purity to target ads more effectively?
 
For all purposes, phone manufacturers are their users, what about making rules on the spot to force these carriers to drop things like not include rival navigation tracking services? Again to retain as much control as they can on tracking data that is used to deliver better targeted advertisement? Would that not make life worse to these clients, specially after they had development done and contracts in place?
 
posted by Hector
 on August 23, 2011 #
 
The Oxford American Dictionary definition of evil:  profoundly immoral and malevolent
 
Somehow, internet ads dont seem to fit into this category.  Privacy-invading?  Probably.  Annoying?  Certainly.  Evil?  Come on.  That being said, a company whose slogan is Dont Be Evil is setting an awfully low bar for morality.
 
posted by Matthew Smith
 on August 23, 2011 #
 
If you look at their examples of evil deeds,  only showing relevant ads, not using pop-ups or other annoying gimmicks, and not selling actual search results.
 
You seem to have got things inverted here: Why would NOT selling actual search results be an example of an evil deed?
 
posted by Rick
 on August 23, 2011 #
 
They specifically name three: only showing relevant ads,  Theyre all instances of refusing to make things worse for your users in order to make more money. 
 
Showing relevant ads is still worse than showing no ads.
 
Google isnt inconsistent here - they dont say or do anything that goes against their philosophy -  but you are giving them more credit than is due. Its still worse for me that there are ads.
 
posted by Jason
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Googles interpretation of evil(tm)?
 
Simple. Whatever they dont do.
 
posted by Ben
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Aaron,
 
John Gruber points out on his blog that since ads are almost always worse for the user than not having them, it is incorrect to describe Googles actions as Theyre all instances of refusing to make things worse for your users in order to make more money..
 
John I think does have a point. But his objection can be overcome with a small modification to your sentence above, to say: Google refuses to make things worse for their users in order to make more money from them. (and of course Google also seems to be committed to keeping the impact minimal when they do make things worse - by adding ads - to make money from others.
 
posted by ravi
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
my problem with google is that I am not their customer, some advertiser is. When awesome search funded by ads became awesome email funded by ads that was ok. But now Google is expanding into areas that do not need google-ification. A social network? same as facebook, but with ads and the same privacy problems people hated about FB, if not worse since you cant make fake names. Yelp? stolen content. Android? given away for free to be chopped up and made fakely open.
 
So google was fine until it started going into areas and just made them free with ads and not better, free and oh yeah, with ads.
 
posted by red
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
By your definition of evil as making things worse for your users in order to make money, in the Kindle example it is Amazon who is evil, not Apple. Apples 30% rule for the AppStore has no bearing on users whatsoever. That affects companies/developers. Its Amazon who made the call to remove any store functionality from the Kindle app in order to make more money.
 
posted by Kevin Ballard
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
by the end of the day it really is just different point of views. Anything can be spinned one way or the other.
 
You think seeing more ads is not making things worse? I think so.
You think having need to upload my drivers license just to modify my name on Google plus is not making things worse? I think so.
 
but by the end of the day, we are not really Googles users. We are like their cows, milking our information is their product, advertisers are their users.
 
posted by Ben
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
1  Poisoning the well by giving products away for free so theres no money for others to compete. Only google has the ad dominance necessary to do free. Its as if there was only ONE television network in the old days of free TV.
 
2 Blatant disregard for the value of content, whether it be software, journalism, entertainment, literature, crowdsourcing. Harvesting the hard work of others to generate billions in profit.
 
3 Using its position of information dominance to control information to its own advantage.
 
4 Tracking every possible piece of information about humans without disclosure or opt out.
 
Evil? Hey google started using the term to poke a stick in Microsofts eye. Now theyre the new Microsoft and dominant in ways MS would never have dreamed of.Theyre creepy, powerful, and unconstrained. And in real life (which is not a comic book) the evil ones generally work overtime to extoll how virtuous they are and have plenty of minions seduced by that fake virtue.
 
posted by yet another steve
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Google has made YouTube worse for users with advertising not only beside videos, but directly over them; and also with unskippable leading ads.
 
Nearly everything about Google is unfortunate.  It is the extension of all that was wrong with television into every part of the web.
 
posted by Mark Heath
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
What about Google intentionally using flash on its cloud music service to block out iOS users?
 
posted by dmd
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Their push to make WebM a standard video format fits this definition of evil. For the same reasons Android fans will scream about Apple being evil for trying to kill Flash, Google is trying to push WebM and kill H.284. You can argue all you want about why wed be better off with WebM, but, just like Flash, H.284 is the standard that has been settled on, and forcing users to switch benefits Google in some very big and profitable ways (in the form of less cash going out the door in licensing fees) and is a pain in the ass for users with no benefit to them.
 
posted by Andre Richards
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Gah! Typed H.284 but meant H.264 obviously.
 
posted by Andre Richards
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
yet another steve is dead on! this spin is amazing. google is not evil they are good they just want to make money, oh ok i did not realize using a monopoly in to control and crush  competitors is good i should have just asked microsoft.
 
posted by chris
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
This post has gotten Matt Cutts, Googles propaganda chief all upset. Stop ruining small business owners Matt and stop rigging organic SERPS by favoring your advertisers, Google books and other Google (inferior and stolen from others) products.
 
Scumbags! Liars! Thieves! Cheaters!
 
posted by Jamie
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Another example comes to mind: Google quietly opting all their users into Buzz (on TWO different occasions) and all the security and personal data lapses that potentially included. For many users, that was a massive annoyance caused primarily to benefit Google and their bottom line.
 
posted by Andre Richards
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Another example comes to mind: Google quietly opting all their users into Buzz (on TWO different occasions) and all the security and personal data lapses that potentially included. For many users, that was a massive annoyance caused primarily to benefit Google and their bottom line.
 
posted by Andre Richards
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
People above have covered a number of Googles evil behaviors, even under the redefined standard of this article.
 
Heres a few more:
Permitting carriers/hardware vendors to determine when and if Android devices are allowed to upgrade to new OS versions.  Apple ensures that users are the priority, not carriers/hardware vendors.
 
Altering search results so that Google services and sites appear above more relevant competitors sites.
 
Sitting your CEO on the board of another company to steal ideas for a new product.
 
Scanning and storing non-encrypted data from wifi access points.
 
Attempting to obtain monopoly control of orphaned books.  Scanning books without the authors consent.
 
posted by David K.
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
This article is ridiculous. Its premised on the idea that making money is bad, its about doing terrible things for bad reasons. Money can be used for things good, bad, and mundane. Your assumption that earning it is bad makes you, what, unemployed?
 
Second, regarding the App Store,  if I had a product to sell and someone said to me that they had a store that millions of people all over the world access daily, they would advertise this store and the mechanisms constantly, costing millions of dollars, where they would provide the mechanism for these people to access and buy from the store, they would take care of all credit card payments (and problems and service fees), that they would even provide gift cards in just about every store on earth from Saks Fifth Avenue to 7-11, and they would carry my product in their store and only charge me 30% of my sales, I would jump on it. Enough already that its evil to actually charge for something of value. Do you live on a hippie commune in the 60s or something? Companies can write their own web app and sell on your website but then the advertising and promotions, order processing, customer service, credit card fiasco, etc. etc. etc. is all up to them - and how much does that cost? More than 30%? Maybe. Getting rid of those headaches is easily worth what Apple charges.
 
posted by PD
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Funny. Didnt laugh so hard in a while.
 
So I become none evil by refusing to make things worse for your users in order to make more money?
 
I get absolution for
- exploiting my employees (google has the lowest salary in IT)
- illegally gathering vast amounts of user data (ups, we captured your WLAN traffic)
- cooperating with a totalitarian government (i.e. china)
 
and plenty more.
 
Hell, if somebody stabs me in the back, I dont care if they put a firesale flyer in my hand or not.
 
posted by Michael
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Printer manufacturers who put chips on their ink cartridges, so you cant refill or recycle them but instead have to buy a new full-price cartridge.
 
You cant really chalk this one up as evil just because you are not aware of the potential difference between genuine and generic ink
 
I have yet to find anyone who makes provable claims for the archival permanence of third party inks
 
Have a look at independent testing by the Wilhelm Institute to learn more and while inks are expensive, the chips are there to protect us from fading prints and the manufacturer from warranty claims for which they should not be liable
 
http://www.wilhelm-research.com/
http://www.wilhelm-research.com/epson/durabrite.html
 
Perhaps the evil is in the people who sell the ink refills without any thought or care for our precious memories
 
posted by Doug
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Never watched youtube videos?
Ultimate annoyance when the bottom part of the video is obscured by ads you have to click away all the time without ever reading them?
 
posted by Hans
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Id say its less evil than charging customers for the products. Really, theyve struck a good balance with their business model.
 
posted by Evil buck 
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Google is worse than Microsoft ever was in the 90s!
 
posted by John
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Excellent article. I have to agree about customer service - Google have made things a lot more difficult for users by insisting that they resolve all of their issues with FAQs and forums. Forums full of people asking the same question that goes unanswered for months are not support.
 
Thats fine when were talking about free products like Gmail and so forth, but when you are a paying enterprise customer, you absolutely must have access to a human being to provide adequate, contextual assistance. In my previous role, I managed our Google Apps for Business and constantly ran up against frustrating issues.
 
posted by Dale P
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Collecting user data without their permission and monetizing it is what Google does.
All the nonsense about open and dont be evil requires willing ignorance on the part of their customers.
 
posted by Darwin
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
What about stealing the codework of competitors and others, then giving away the compiled output as a cellphone OS for free when one of your chief competitors earns income from licensing its OS?
 
I think Microsoft is of the opinion that Googles actions are evil. It remains to be seen if the courts agree.
 
posted by George Kaplan
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
What about when they bump up the # of ads on search results pages to make their numbers for the quarter?  That seems like user experience comes at the cost of revenue choices
 
posted by cristobaloo
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Rick: Good catch  fixed.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
Google is the biggest porn site on the planet. Is that evil? not necessarily. Allowing under aged people to view it? That is evil!
 
posted by flaktrak
 on August 29, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 18, 2011
 
Title: Understanding Groupon Means Understanding ACSOI
 
Imagine you started a business that delivered people a box of cereal each week. Each week they pay you, you take their money and buy a box of cereal and some shipping, and keep whats left over. You learn that the average new customer brings in $50 in profit over their lifetime, so you decide to spend some of that money to get new customers  say, by buying web ads.
 
With web ads, you can say exactly how much you want to spend for each new customer. Now the future isnt necessarily like the past  things could go wrong  but it seems safe to, say, spend $5 to get a new customer. If the future is like the past, youll make $45 each time you do this. And even if future customers are only half as good as current ones, youll still be making $20 each time you do this!
 
How much money should you spend on marketing? Well, others have started to notice you making money hand-over-fist and have decided to start competing. Best to get people hooked on your service than on theirs, right? And each dollar you spend now is going to bring in ten times later, so itd be crazy not to spend everything you could, right? Youre only making $10 million a year right now o you get your investors to put in another $100 million and quickly spend it all on marketing.
 
Now by traditional accounting standards, youre $90 million in the red. But that seems like a misleading way to count. After all, if you stopped marketing tomorrow youd have a nice, profitable $10 million a year business. Instead it makes sense to look at the $10 million dollars a year youre making on the one hand and your aggressive expansion plan (in particular, how much it costs to get a new customer and the lifetime value expected from a new customer) on the other.
 
This, as best as I can tell, was the story of Groupon. They called that first number (the business you have now, aside from the expansion attempt) ACSOI.
 
But the press didnt seem to understand any of this. Groupon was pilloried for playing accounting games that turned a huge loss into a moderate profit. And when, in response, Groupon took the ACSOI numbers out of their prospectus, it was hailed as a victory over fraudulent accounting.
 
Which all strikes me as ridiculous. Groupon didnt hide the fact that they were losing money by traditional accounting standards. They said so up front, but then provided the additional data that they use internally. Just some additional information, no pressure: While we track this management metric internally to gauge our performance, we encourage you to base your investment decision on whatever metrics make you comfortable, they said. How does taking this information out of the prospectus help anyone?
 
Now there are valid questions about this model. Perhaps the future wont be like the past, perhaps Groupons cost-per-acquisition is way too high, perhaps trying to grow so fast is risky. Or maybe Groupon is presenting misleading ACSOI numbers and even if they stopped all marketing today theyd still be losing money. Id genuinely like to know. But the discussion needs to start with understanding what theyre saying, not just pretending theyre making stuff up.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 18, 2011
 
I think the press and market have understood Groupon quite clearly.  They have a challenging business, and its common in those cases for managers to find metrics that cast the business in a more favorable light.
 
The challenge with your view is that its very hard to distinguish between marketing spend that drives current business and marketing spend that drives future business.  If you spend $10 to get Mary as a customer, you hope she comes back again, but you wont know until then how much of your $10 went to getting her business today, vs getting her future (lifetime) value.
 
Hence, ASCOI, since it excluded important marketing spend to keep the existing business going, wasnt that helpful, and was even a bit misleading.
 
posted by Andy
 on August 18, 2011 #
 
I guess this is kind of the key point. Groupon doesnt need to market to current customers. They can just email them. Its much more effective.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 18, 2011 #
 
That assumes that Groupons customers continue to respond to email at the same conversion rate (e.g. they never fatigue after their first Groupon) and that email customers never unsubscribe.
 
You cant assume either of those.
 
posted by Andy
 on August 18, 2011 #
 
Both of those are already included into the lifetime customer value which can be derived from real customers who fatigue and unsubscribe.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 18, 2011 #
 
The ACSOI criticism Ive read has been based on the idea Groupon never sufficiently motivated its invention and use. They dropped it in like a cherry on top, so that some profit was shown, with only cursory explanation.
 
A better explanation could have addressed ACSOI critics concerns and your valid questions if in fact the ACSOI approach was justifiable.
 
However, the details that could justify an if you stopped marketing tomorrow analysis  like customer/business loyalty  are turning against Groupon, making lifetime value very murky.
 
That said, I wouldnt have forced Groupon to elide any information about how they internally value their business from their prospectus. (If nothing else, its evidence of how theyre lying to themselves.)
 
Investors dont need a paternalistic SEC protecting
 
posted by Gordon Mohr
 on August 18, 2011 #
 
[er, hit publish too soon]
 
Investors dont need a paternalistic SEC protecting them from more information, only blatantly false information. The marketplace of ideas works better than ever, certainly better than a 1930s-erected regulatory structure.
 
posted by Gordon Mohr
 on August 18, 2011 #
 
It sounds like you came up with this on your own (kudos), but this is a well known concept called customer lifetime value.
 
No one analyzing Groupons filing misunderstood the concept of lifetime value. The tricky part isnt understanding the concept that securing a stream of payments in the future is worth paying for, the tricky part is modelling what those payments are going to be and how much they are worth today.
 
ASCOI implies a level of profitability which is achievable with zero marketing. The model underlying this is incredibly simplistic and almost certainly the wrong way to look at their customer lifetime value.
 
posted by Adam
 on August 18, 2011 #
 
I think the problem with your allegory is that your customers actually get a box of cereal every week.  Groupon actually doesnt deliver anything of direct tangible value to the consumer.  I could sign up and NEVER get any benefit because I dont like any of the stuff theyre hawking.
 
A slightly different perspective can be found on my blog
 
posted by Mike Mainguy
 on August 18, 2011 #
 
I would challenge the assumption that if Groupon stopped spending marketing money, their revenue would continue.
 
The vast majority of Groupons marketing budget was spent marketing TO BUSINESSES (ie: acquiring deals). They have thousands of employees calling every business in every country they operate, right? If they stop that, then the deals dry up and they have nothing to sell.
 
Theres some evidence the Groupon phenomenon was a fad, and in 2 years people will stop buying these coupons.
 
posted by Scott
 on August 18, 2011 #
 
Interesting analysishas given me some ideas, thank you!
 
posted by Zezzy
 on August 18, 2011 #
 
vast majority of Groupons marketing budget was spent marketing TO BUSINESSES
 
False. Its marketing costs are almost exclusively related to building its email list and account base. Its sales efforts are included in SG&A.
 
So, yes, Groupon could bring marketing spend to $0 and still run an effective business.
 
posted by pbreit
 on August 18, 2011 #
 
Is there more scrutiny and suspicion because the founders and early investors took out over $800M from the last round?
 
posted by \Mike
 on August 19, 2011 #
 
@ Mike-  Great point!  And is this not the main reason so many start-ups fail- bosses over paying themselves?  No one does business for the love of it anymore, it seems a if everyone has gone greedy.
 
posted by Zezzy
 on August 19, 2011 #
 
Or maybe Groupon is presenting misleading ACSOI numbers and even if they stopped all marketing today theyd still be losing money.
 
They were profitable in the past, so if they stopped marketing, they probably would be profitable again.
 
But I dont think they correctly predict lifetime customer value.
 
posted by Douglas Knight
 on August 24, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 22, 2011
 
Title: How Apple Works
 
Who takes over for Steve Jobs?1 John Gruber recently posted his argument for thinking it will be COO Tim Cook. The biggest point in Cooks favor is simple: Hes already run the company while Jobs has been on leave. Thats true, but its less meaningful than it sounds. But to understand why, you need to understand how Apple works.
 
In the same way that Google is a company driven by engineering or Amazon is driven by operations, Apple is driven by taste. Heres how Apple products are created: a team of designers decide exactly what a product should do and how it should look and feel, their work is ruthlessly edited by Steve until he approves, and then the entire rest of the company is given the task of moving mountains to make that dream real.
 
Tim Cook is in charge of that third step. And hes done a masterful job of it, accomplishing endless miracles never been seen by the public. Apple engineers have invented entirely new chips to fit the specified processing power into the tiny cases required by the spec; they build entirely new factories with entirely new production processes just to perfectly match the shade of pink in the original design; theyve created a revolution in logistics to ensure these amazing products get into customers hands on launch day. Cook runs this process, and theres no doubt hes brilliant at it.
 
But its about fulfilling Jobs dreams, not forging new ones. He can continue to run the company while Jobs is away because hes continuing to ensure the execution of designs that Jobs has already approved. But Apple cant run indefinitely on old plans. The only reason it works for Cook to be in charge while Steve is away is because Steve is still around, doing ruthless critiques of yet-to-be-invented products from his sickbed.
 
The only person with the credibility to helm Apple in the long run is a person who can do those critiques. And for all Cooks brilliance, Ive seen no evidence  hes a master of great taste. His creativity is at achieving a predetermined goal, not about deciding what goal to achieve.
 
As Gruber says, whoever takes Steves place will be someone already at Apple. Not just because all the other options are absurd, but because Steve has spent the past decade or so carefully training his top lieutenants about how to do every aspect of his job. It makes no sense to hire from outside that elite group. But within that group, theres only one person who makes any sense as tastemaker-in-chief: Jony Ive.
 
This becomes obvious if you just watch the keynotes. Steve Jobs is well known for raising the product keynote to an art form. But the others who have taken over the speaking job in recent years  Scott Forstall, Phil Schiller, Tim Cook  seem like clumsy kids trying to fill the shoes of the master. Theres only one person at Apple who gives talks with the elegance and style of Steve: Jony Ive.
 
Now the big criticism of Ive is that while he is clearly one of the most brilliant industrial designers in the world, hes shown no aptitude for software design. Its hard to know whether this is true. The Mobile Design Awards credited Ive with the iPhones user interface, but the patent credits Jobs and Forstall and a dozen others, but not Ive.
 
But even if Ive never designed a piece of software in his life, itd be beside the point. I cant imagine Jobs has either. Whats needed atop Apple is not creative brilliance  they have a design department full of that  but editorial taste. Like the director of a film, Apples CEO needs to go through the thousands of creative ideas developed within Apple and decide which ones should be approved for production and which ones need to sent back for more work.
 
Its impossible to imagine Apple functioning without this role. (Would Apple splinter and start developing all sorts of random unapproved products like Google under Eric Schmidt?) Its impossible to imagine Tim Cook filling this role. (How can he be tastemaker for the whole company if he cant even pull off a decent keynote?) And its impossible to imagine this role being anywhere but at the top of the org chart. (Itd be like crediting a film to the producer instead of the director.)
 
No, if Apple is to continue, it will be with a tastemaker at the top. And there are no serious candidates besides Ive.
 
This piece was written before Steve stepped down as CEO, but I think it still stands. I mean when Steve really leaves: it seems obvious that even as Chairman of the Board rather than CEO, hes still tastemaker-in-chief at Apple.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 22, 2011
 
Swartz 1, Gruber 0 ;-)
 
Funny quote (from Gruber):
ANYONE ELSE FROM GOOGLE. No credibility within Apple regarding design, no experience with hardware products.
 
Its amazing just how blind Google is to design. Their web interfaces are generally both confusing and ugly. (Their initial search page design is the exception. As is the current redesign.) How do they do it? Can they not just hire interface designers?
 
Ira Glass suggests if you want to do good creative work, you first need good taste. Thats not the sort of thing anyone is going to teach you at art school. But its very true. And under-rated. Jon Ive it is.
 
posted by bradbell.tv
 on July 23, 2011 #
 
Swartz 1, Gruber 1  :-)
.
Gruber is explicitly talking about Apple CEO succession and youre talking about the role of creative force and face of Apple. Call it CCO, if you want.
 
Even if its truly impossible to imagine this role being anywhere but at the top of the org chart, that still doesnt mean Ive will be CEO.  Maybe, but Ive seen nothing to suggest hed want the distractions of the CEO role. At Apple, why does CEO have to be the top of the organization chart?
 
Anyway, the limits of your imagination are not evidence of anything about what Apple can do.
 
posted by PaulP
 on July 24, 2011 #
 
Jobs is a product communicator, Ive is a product designer. Theres some overlap but the roles arent interchangeable.
 
posted by Gaurav Sharma
 on July 24, 2011 #
 
The key is the point Gruber makes toward the end of his article: Apple after Steve Jobs will simply be Apple as it is now, without Steve Jobs. The question of who will become CEO is a distraction.
 
posted by Aristotle Pagaltzis
 on July 26, 2011 #
 
An unstated assumption here is that for Apple to keep being awesome it has to run similarly to how it runs under Steve.
 
It has to keep doing a lot of the things Steves been crucial to  has to boldly, competently trek into scary new territory; someone has to know when a business unit has made a stinker (MobileMe) and call BS; a great team needs recruited.
 
Thats not as simple as having a CEO and a design person and I think Cook needs to get Apple pretty deeply  we need a better prototype, now has more weight coming from the CEO; he at least needs to demonstrate that the forces of creativity in the company have his full backing.  Cook needs to meld taste with utility or strategy when they intersect (WebKit on the iPhone, maybe).  He needs to see where the puck is going.  He needs a communications strategy thats a worthy successor to the Jobs keynote.
 
Like Gruber, I dont buy the rub that Cook is just an execution guy and couldnt well and truly run the company.  He cant be Steve, but the point isnt to be Steve, its to know and keep up what makes Apple awesome.
 
Cook might even bring some good changes to Apple, heretical as that notion is  could be a future with fewer antennagates and buttonless iPod Shuffles, maybe even something ridiculous like a Mac laptop under $1k.
 
Id give Cook about 2/3 odds of getting it (maybe theres another great internal candidate at Apple, or maybe the board will really shoot itself in the foot) and I wouldnt bet that Apple without Steve will either collapse or just look exactly like current Apple minus Steve.  Talk to me in a few years and well see how it panned out.
 
posted by R
 on July 26, 2011 #
 
I got a bit of phrasing tragically wrong there: I dont buy the rub that Cook is just an execution guy and couldnt well and truly run the company.
 
You clearly said how important and amazing Cooks COO work is and I doubt youd ever say anything is just implementation.  Just want to clarify that if anyones out there writing off what Cook does as mere execution it aint you.
 
posted by R
 on July 26, 2011 #
 
Steve Jobs has never designed a piece of software!?
 
posted by 
 on August 27, 2011 #
 
Anon Coward: What software has Steve designed? The only thing I can think of thats even remotely plausible is Keynote and it seems pretty clear that whatever he designed, it was a small part of what made it into 1.0. But Id love to learn otherwise.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 27, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 18, 2011
 
Title: Watch That Space
 
Theres a major statement at the Demand Progress blog.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 18, 2011
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 18, 2011
 
Title: Goods, Services, and Delegations
 
Things you can buy are typically divided into tangible things (goods) and intangible actions (services). But recently Ive realized theres a much more interesting type of thing to buy: delegations.
 
A delegation is like a service, except instead of asking someone to do a specific thing, you ask them to achieve some goal. Hiring someone to paint your wall white would be a service, hiring someone to make your house pretty is a delegation.
 
Delegations are a lot harder than services. In the same way you can be pretty sure that when you buy a pen it will write, you can be pretty sure that when you hire someone to paint your wall white, shell actually do it. And if she doesnt, you can just not pay her.
 
But if you want to hire an interior designer, its a mess. Lets say you pick one by looking through their portfolio and concluding that you like their work. But when they come to design your place, you hate the result. What can you do? You say that what you got looks nothing like the stuff in the portfolio and theyll just say that every space is different and so has a different result. Theres no way to ever prove they did a bad job.
 
And thats something fairly inconsequential. Imagine youre wrongly charged with murder or stricken with a potentially-fatal illness. Picking the right lawyer or doctor could make the difference between life and death.
 
But now theres not even a portfolio for you to look at. Sure, you can see if the lawyers won a lot of cases or if the doctors kept most of her patients alive, but that doesnt tell you much  it probably just means theyre either very lucky or mostly choose easy cases.
 
Perhaps instead of looking at outcomes, you could look at the decisions they made along the way. But even if you could get your hands on those records, how could you possibly learn enough about law or medicine to evaluate them? And even if you somehow tried, theres probably all sorts of relevant specific details about the circumstances that could never make it into even the most detailed histories.
 
But its not just hard for the delegator  for the same reason, its hard for the delegatee. If you want to be great at painting walls white, its easy to get pretty immediate feedback about whether you did the job correctly. But if youre a elementary school teacher, youll really just never know. You hope youre helping your kids succeed in life, but theres no way for you to check that. And what are the chances that you started doing everything right just by intuition?
 
No, the expert performance movement has shown the only way to get really good at something is to practice, continually comparing what you did against the results it achieved. But in any sort of delegated job this is practically impossible: the uncertainties are too great, the feedback loops take too long, the opportunities to practice much too rare.
 
Traditionally, we solve these problems by having an academic discipline figure out the right thing to do using scale. If doctors were just on their own, theyd still be no better than witch doctors: people would come in with problems and theyd pick a random herb or spell to try and pray it made the patient feel better. Theyd never really know whether they were helping or hurting. But theyre not on their own: because medical schools can conduct randomized trials with hundreds of people, they can just read the results and learn what actually works.
 
A lot is still left to individual judgment  theres not a medical study for every scenario and even if there was, youd still have to choose how to interpret the results  but there is definitely a trend toward knowing more. And some of the most exciting developments in medicine come from replacing human judgment with checklists and decision trees.
 
But medicine is probably the best-case scenario. Ive never heard of lawyers reading up on the results of statistical trials and aesthetics is so subjective and fashion so temporary that I doubt anything like this could ever be possible for interior designers. (Education is probably somewhere in the middle.) How do people ever get good at these things?
 
Part of why running a nonprofit is so hard is that pretty much all nonprofits are delegation. Donors arent buying a particular thing they know they want, theyre buying a chance to help others, without knowing exactly what it is they want. And thats why randomized controlled trials have been transformational for the nonprofit sector  theyve converted a delegation into a service. Great nonprofits dont have to guess at what will help people the most; they just need to look up the most helpful service and then purchase more of it.
 
Poor Economics is a remarkable book if only because it shows how crucial this is. Its full of tales of small-scale experiments where well-intentioned do-gooders try hard to help some people and fail catastrophically. But they only notice because there are academics there collecting data; in the typical nonprofit, where the decisionmakers are far removed from the evidence on the ground, theyd probably never know that much was going wrong (assuming that they even cared).
 
But political nonprofits dont get off so easily. Its fairly impractical to do randomized controlled trials of things like lobbying, public campaigning, white papers, investigative journalism, public relations, strategic litigation, electoral campaigns, and the rest. There are brave and noble efforts to try to improve some of the details most amenable to testing, but while you can test which direct mail flyer makes people more likely to vote, its hard to test whether GOTV mail is a good use of campaign funds at all.
 
Now you can get a lot out of combining all these things so you can make big-picture decisions about how to allocate resources. And you can get a lot out of having the same team do them over and over so they can build up institutional expertise. But theres also a lot of room for learning within each one as well. Just as randomized controlled trials have revolutionized development nonprofits, I think political nonprofits will be revolutionized by developing institutional structures to formalize the process of learning from campaigns.
 
What would this look like? A good first step would be developing a series of case studies of major campaigns, successful or unsuccessful, to get some sense of big picture stories. From this, you could distill a toolbook of various tactics, with some notes on which seem to be more and less effective and some open questions or avenues of exploration for each. Then within each tactic, you could bring together practitioners to swap best practices and try to improve the state of the art.
 
Interviewing people right after campaigns also seems like a fruitful avenue. As they look back on what happened, what do they see as the big mistakes? The big successes? What do they wish theyd had?
 
These might all seem like minor, parochial concerns, but when you stop to realize that the world is full of huge problems that can only be solved by collective action, figuring out how to inspire coordinated action most effectively doesnt just seem interesting  it seems essential.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 18, 2011
 
Hi, Aaron. The http://igs.berkeley.edu/ newsletter has been reporting out the after-action interviews for decades. Id be interested in seeing IGS use their access to campaigners and practitioners to turn the reports from anecdotes and lore to quantitative and systematic analysis.
 
http://igs.berkeley.edu/publications/par/
 
posted by Phil Wolff
 on July 21, 2011 #
 
You linked to GiveWell. Part of their story that might have parallels in learning from campaigns: most big charities werent ready to open up enough for a rigorous evaluation. But GiveWell works anyway because they managed to find a few groups that are both great and transparent, and they help the field by publishing everything from each evaluation.
 
So maybe an effort to learn from campaigns isnt sunk if some political folks arent ready to be candid about big campaigns. As long as some people are doing big/interesting/novel projects and are ready to share nitty-gritty (and maybe numbers), we can still get a lot out of it. And, honestly, the candid and reflective pros might be the ones most likely to teach us something.
 
And, uh, I was sleepily writing a rambly comment on this post Monday night, filed it away, and then things happened  good luck to you and your delegates.
 
posted by Randall
 on July 22, 2011 #
 
A good first step would be developing a series of case studies of major campaigns, successful or unsuccessful, to get some sense of big picture stories.
 
I hadnt thought of this, Im gonna do this.
 
posted by jonathan
 on July 23, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: June 22, 2011
 
Title: New Homepage
 
Sorry for the quiet here, but Ive updated my home page for the first time in five years. Take a look at it if youre looking for basic background info on me.
 
Also, weve been doing regular blogging over at the Demand Progress Blog so you may want to check that for interesting new things instead.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 22, 2011
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: April  6, 2011
 
Title: Individuals in a World of Science
 
We are all the same, we are all differentthis is the great modern dilemma. At the same time science and technology lets us see our patterns (guess what books well like without ever meeting us, predict the probability with which a certain drug will have a certain side effect) our social independence encourages us to believe we cannot be so easily controlled (thus millions of people watching the same TV ad insisting they think different).
 
The tension can be felt most acutely in medicine, where a long and storied tradition of individualism (each patient is unique, with their own symptoms and history and makeup) confronts the most expensive products of modern megascience (every pill of a drug is the same, its workings validated through a test on thousands of people). And then you have doctors, caught in the middle: what are they to bebrilliant individuals, cunningly solving problems on their own (or, more realistically, with a small team) or dutiful cogs, administering the treatments shown most effective by large experiments?
 
For every individual person, you can come up with a story about why the larger results may not apply (most of the people in that study were young and healthy, but you are old and frail). But that just replaces hard science with educated suspicion. On the whole what was proven true on the whole must work better, right?
 
This is the position of evidence-based medicine, which says that doctors cant be trusted to make these decisions by themselves. Unduly swayed by whim and bias, bribed in endless ways by the manufacturers of expensive drugs and tools, incentivized to give themselves more business, EBM proponents say we must take these choices out of their hands and give them to a panel of experts, who can review with time and distance what solid scientific studies say actually works and does not.
 
Ive made it sound like Im on the side of the scientific mass, but Im really not. Is there any evidence that evidence-based medicine really works? Everything Ive seen is shockingly inconclusive.
 
There have been big benefits from smaller interventionsgiving doctors tools to encourage them to do the right things. Atul Gawande has been the greatest chronicler of such programs, from forceful reminders to wash your hands to careful checklists before surgery. But for the most part such programs aid doctors, not overrule them. This is good politics, but its also good science: everyone rebels against direct instruction.
 
I think we have a choice to make. Doctors can be simply told what to doin which case, why require all those years of med school? why not write down all the rules and instructions and let any random nurse follow them?or they can be taught the lessons of the science but allowed to practice it on their own. They can be show their own human frailties and biases, the huge value that comes from following the proven rules, trained in the common fallacies of probability andstatistics, but in the end, allowed to make the final judgment for themselves. We can screen out those who fail to learn these lessons, but if we cant, at the end of the process, trust them to make their own decisions, why even bother to have doctors at all?
 
Medicine is the field where this is clearest, but the same tension has come to teaching as wellevery student is the same, every student is different. We once allowed each teacher to direct their classroom in their own way, but high-stakes tests and value-added measurements now force all of them into the same mold.
 
Isnt this a good thing, demands Matt Yglesias? We have science that shows good teaching can make a huge difference in peoples livesdoesnt everyone deserve the benefits that come from having a good teacher? He dismisses the stories of the individual horrors that result from this process as mere anecdoteinevitably in imposing a one-size-fits-all solution there will be some negative side effects for a few, but the benefits for the many outweigh the costs. Again, I have tried to put this position in its most favorable light (I hope Matt will correct me if Ive failed) but Im flabbergasted by its callous naivet. The problem with allowing hard incentive systems to squeeze out individual judgment is inevitably that people begin trying to game the systemthey cheat on the tests, they coach students on the answers, they cut recess and art for more drill-and-skill. To dismiss the on-the-ground evidence of how badly these tests hurt kids, in favor of some Olympian view of the benefits of rising test scores, is ludicrous when the on-the-ground view is telling you the test scores are actually bogus.
 
Fine, Matt says, that just means we need to crack down on cheating. (This is always the first response of the incentive designerwe just need to improve the incentive system!) The fact that a couple teachers cheat on their students tests is no reason to give up on all the benefits better teachers can being. And thats true, but blatant cheating is just the tip of the iceberg.
 
In medicine, we can at least measure whether people get healthy. A doctor with some radical new treatment can prove shes right by testing it against the previous best answer and showing it works better. And we want brilliant teachers to do the same: to come up with innovative new ways of teaching students and prove they work better than the old stale system. But the ultimate goal of school is much less clear and more disputedis it to create orderly little capitalist worker bees or curious independent thinkers?
 
Matt says please, we dont need to enter into this debate. Im only talking about the fundamentalsbasic literacy and arithmetic. But I dont think that really helps. What good is learning to read if, by the end, you hate doing it?
 
One solution is to measure students by real results, rather than artificial tests. Can a child read and understand? Ask them to tell you about the books theyve read lately. (This was how my librarys summer reading program tested whether you actually read the books you claimed. Apparently I didnt understand most of Snow Crash as a kid, but I loved reading it anyway.) Or, better yet, ask them a question that involves doing some research and see if they can look up and read the answer.
 
For math, ask them to build something that involves a little calculation, or make change, or any of the real-world activities these isolated skills are supposed to be actually useful for. What you learn from that will be much more revealing than which bubbles kids fill in on a sheet.
 
The other alternative is to put your trust in teachers, to assume they can tell the difference between a class thats learning and a class that isnt, and then give them a chance to do better. Take them to some of the best-run classes in the world and let them absorb the lessons for themselves. Have them meet regularly with their fellow teachers and discuss how they can make their teaching better. This is the humane response to those who want to reduce teaching to a rote question of merely reading off a script (no jokethis is literally what happens in the most test-driven schoolsbecause, after all, science shows the script is best for test scores).
 
In both cases, I sympathize with the humane aims: I dont want doctors to become shills for pharmaceutical companies, I dont want poor kids to grow up unable to read. But I blanch at the inhumane means proposed to carry them out. As Seeing Like a State describes, the history of high modernist utopian projects has not been a pretty one. The quest for policy designers, then, is how to promote huge positive changes without crushing the individuals involved underfoot.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April  6, 2011
 
The problem with tests is that some teachers and administrators do bad things to make the test results come out well.  The problem without the tests is that some teachers and administrators dont give the students an education because there are no consequences.
 
Im not worried about the good teachers.  But there are many mediocre to bad teachers, and no amount of continuing education for the teachers has a realistic chance of fixing that.  Do you have a proposal that doesnt depend on the bad teachers magically improving?  The advantage of the test based approach is that theoretically you can improve the incentives, so at least theres some path to improvement.  It strikes me that the other side is simply giving up, which is depressing.
 
posted by Lawrence
 on April  6, 2011 #
 
I think thats rather unfair to science-based medicine. Its the only way that we actually know, at all, whether or not a treatment is having an effect. Its certainly imperfect, but better than the alternative (which is to rely on tried-and-true heuristics that may or may not actually have a statistically significant effect).
 
posted by Brett
 on April  6, 2011 #
 
Yglesias is too enamored with the economics profession to imagine policy solutions other than giving technocrats more information about where to efficiently allocate capital and more power to allocate it.
 
posted by Matthew
 on April  6, 2011 #
 
@Brett, I think that whether evidence based is better than the alternative is the notion in dispute. Out of laziness Ill point to Robin Hansons work on this topic, for example regarding medicines big picture effects http://www.overcomingbias.com/tag/medicine
 
posted by Marcus
 on April  8, 2011 #
 
The continuing McDonaldsization of all industries.  If you analyze what has happened to education, medicine, agriculture, financial services, etc. youll see an uncanny resemblance to the process McDonalds used in dominating the fast food industryautomate the system as much as possible by creating a large sociotechnical machine whose priorities are dictated mainly by financial (or government) incentives.
 
The capitalist end-game is not to create the best human society possible (and as a corollary the best humans possible), it is to create the most efficient system for increasing a nations wealth as defined by GDP.
 
posted by haig
 on May 22, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January  6, 2011
 
Title: Squaring the Triangle: Secure, Decentralized, Human-Readable Names
 
When using computers, we like to refer to things with names. For example, this website is known as www.aaronsw.com. You can type that into your browser and read these words. There are three big properties we might want from such names:
 
In a classic paper, my friend Zooko argued that you can get at most two of these properties at any one time.
 
Recently, DNS legend Dan Kaminsky used this to argue that since electronic cash was pretty much the same as naming, Zookos triangle applied to it as well. He used this to argue that BitCoin, the secure, decentralized, human-meaningful electronic cash system was impossible. I have my problems with BitCoin, but its manifestly not impossible, so I just assumed Kaminsky had gone wrong somewhere.
 
But tonight I realized that you can indeed use BitCoin to square Zookos triangle. Heres how it works:
 
Let there be a document called the scroll. The scroll consists of a series of lines and each line consists of a tuple (name, key, nonce) such that the first N bits of the hash of the scroll from the beginning to the end of a line are all zero. As a result, to add a line to the scroll, you need to do enough computation to discover an appropriate nonce that causes the bits of the hash to be zero.
 
To look up a name, you ask everyone you know for the scroll, trust whichever scroll is the longest, and then start from the beginning and take the key for the first line with the name youre looking up. To publish a name, you find an appropriate nonce and then send the new line to everyone you know.
 
OK, lets pause there for a second. How do you steal names in such a system? First, you need to need to calculate a new nonce for the line you want to steal and every subsequent line. Second, you need to get your replacement scroll to the user. The first is difficult, but perhaps not impossible, depending on how many lines ago the name you want to steal is. It requires having some large multiple of the rest of the networks combined CPU power. This seems like a fairly strong constraint to me, but apparently not to Dan. Luckily, were saved by the second question.
 
Let there be a group of machines called the network. Each remembers the last scroll it trusted. When a new valid line is created its sent to everyone in the network and they add it to their scroll.1 Now stealing an old name is impossible, since machines in the network only add new names, they dont accept replacements for old ones.
 
Thats fine for machines already in the network, but how do you join? Well, as a physical law, to join a network you need the identity of at least one machine already in the network. Now when you join, that machine can give you a fabricated scroll where theyve stolen all the names. I dont think theres any way to avoid this  if you dont know anyone willing to tell you the correct answer, you cant will the correct answer out of thin air. Even a centralized system depends on knowing at least one honest root.
 
You can ameliorate this problem by knowing several nodes when you connect and asking each of them for their scroll. It seems like the best theoretically-possible case would be requiring only one node to be honest. That would correspond to trusting whichever node had the longest scroll. But this would leave you vulnerable to an attacker who a) has enough CPU power to fabricate the longest scroll, and b) can co-opt at least one of your initial nodes. The alternative is to trust only scrolls you receive from a majority of your list of nodes. This leaves you vulnerable to an attacker who can co-opt a majority of your initial nodes. Which tradeoff you pick presumably depends on how much you trust your initial nodes.
 
Publishing a false scroll is equivalent to fragmenting the namespace and starting a separate network. (We can enforce this by requiring nodes to sign each latest scroll and publish their signature to be considered members-in-good-standing of the network. Any node that attempts to sign two contradictory scroll is obviously duplicitous and can be discounted.) So another way of describing scenario (b) is to say that to join a network, you need a list of nodes where at least a majority are actually nodes in the network. This doesnt seem like an overly strenuous requirement.
 
And were actually slightly safer than that, since the majority needs a fair amount of CPU to stay plausible. If we assume that you hear new names from some out-of-band source, for them to work on the attackers network, the attacker must have enough CPU to generate lines for each name you might use. Otherwise you realize that the names you type in on your computer are returning 404s while they work on other peoples computers and begin to realize youve been had by an attacker.
 
So there you have it. The names are secure: theyre identifiable by a key of arbitrary length and cannot be stolen. Theyre human-meaningful: the name can be whatever string you like. And theyre decentralized: no centralized authority determines who gets what name and yet theyre available to everyone in the network.
 
Zookos triangle has been squared.
 
UPDATE: Im gratified by all the feedback and Ive put up a Frequently Asked Questions page in response to comments here and elsewhere.
 
What happens if two people create a new line at the same time? The debate should be resolved by the creation of the next new line  whichever line is previous in its scroll is the one to trust.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  6, 2011
 
I admit I havent looked at BitCoin, but wont the scroll get awfully long pretty fast?
 
posted by Nikita Borisov
 on January  6, 2011 #
 
yea there has already been some thinking about this.
 
see this forum thread: http://www.bitcoin.org/smf/index.php?topic=1790.0
 
and this protocol proposal:
http://privwiki.dreamhosters.com/wiki/Bitcoin_DNS_System_Proposal
 
posted by n
 on January  6, 2011 #
 
What happens when someone launches a DOS attack, registering billions of likely names?
The social problems of DNS are just as hard as the technical ones, unfortunately.
 
posted by Noel Grandin
 on January  6, 2011 #
 
Another approach to the same issue: http://www.lshift.net/blog/2007/11/10/squaring-zookos-triangle
 
posted by Adam Langley
 on January  6, 2011 #
 
Nikita: Perhaps. There are some practical optimizations you can probably make to eliminate the need to ship the whole thing around all the time.  I was going to write about them, but Im not sure its actually necessary  people routinely download multi-gigabyte movies on the Internet and the text data here will probably weigh a lot less.
 
Noel: You pick an N so that this is unlike/infeasible. Right now it only costs $5-10 to register a domain name; you could pick an N where it cost $10 to compute.
 
Adam: Yeah, I liked the lshift post, but it gets much weaker results on the meaningful prong. I mean, area-fluid-above-movie-start isnt really something youre going to see in movie trailers anytime soon.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January  6, 2011 #
 
Noel writes (via email):
 
If you pick a really high N, it becomes problematic to create a new name.
  If you pick a low N, in a couple of years it becomes possible to launch a DOS.
 
I didnt go into this in the piece, because it wasnt directly relevant, but I have a couple ideas.
 
You can pick a function N=f(t) where t is the date so that N grows over time, then you only have to worry about getting the growth rate wrong.
 
You can have the network vote in some way on adopting new values of N.
 
You can have an algorithm for gradually increasing N if new names get minted too quickly  i.e. if you see more than X new lines within Y seconds, increase N by 1.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January  6, 2011 #
 
How would such a system handle name expiry?
 
posted by blake8086
 on January  6, 2011 #
 
Ive been re-reading the bitcoin paper, and it strikes me that some of the changes in the above description (presumably made as simplifications for explanatory purposes) might kind of matter.
 
You have each line satisfying hash(scroll up to end of line), rather than bitcoins chained-blocks paradigm.  It seems like this may really start to matter once the size of the scroll gets large?
 
I also keep having a niggling fear that theres some relation between the # of names which can be registered per unit time and the N chosen.  Specifically, I worry that with N sufficiently large that domain registration costs a reasonable amount, it will be impossible to find the appropriate nonce for it before the world has moved on and you have to start from a new base scroll.
 
With bitcoin its not supposed to cost anything to publish a transaction, and then everyone works on finding the next block which will contain that tx (and earns a coin for being the first to find one.)  But here, while lines in the scroll are analogous to transactions, we want people to bear the cost of registering the name themselves.  I dont know.  I feel like Im missing something.
 
posted by Emile
 on January  7, 2011 #
 
You have each line satisfying hash(scroll up to end of line), rather than bitcoins chained-blocks paradigm. It seems like this may really start to matter once the size of the scroll gets large?
 
Yeah, I guess thats an engineering optimization?
 
I also keep having a niggling fear that theres some relation between the # of names which can be registered per unit time and the N chosen. Specifically, I worry that with N sufficiently large that domain registration costs a reasonable amount, it will be impossible to find the appropriate nonce for it before the world has moved on and you have to start from a new base scroll.
 
You have this intuition that when the scroll is advanced you have to start over from the beginning in looking for a new nonce, but I dont think thats true. For any nonce you try, I think the probability of it being correct is the same no matter what the scroll is. So it should take you the same amount of time to find a working nonce no matter how many times the scroll changes while youre doing it.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 10, 2011 #
 
Ah, youre right, that was exactly my thinking.  Thanks.
 
posted by Emile
 on January 10, 2011 #
 
When a new valid line is created its sent to everyone in the network and they add it to their scroll.
Realistically, the bigger problem than that of two people creating a name at the same time is less than that of name propagation taking longer than name creation. That is, nodes that are disconnected for a bit too long would not receive a new name before the rest of the network has already moved on to the next.
 
Effectively youre fragmenting the network all over the place then. Nodes with a scroll that have the same age (where age is # lines in the scroll) would find it easy to agree on a new name, but they might be several iterations behind the latest version of the scroll.
 
As to the concerns that some people raise about the length of the scroll (which becomes relevant here, as one solution to the above would be to force nodes to start with a blank scroll as they join):
 
According to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain_name weve now reached some 196 million domain names. A line in your scroll would be some 20 or so characters for the domain name (could easily grow larger), lets make it compact and say no more than 128 bits/16 bytes for an IPv6 address, and oh, some 512 bits / 64 bytes for a hash. Altogether at least 100 bytes per line, times 196 mio = 18 GiB.
 
Yeah, I dont see anyone transmitting that every time they join the network.
 
Let there be a document called the scroll. The scroll consists of a series of lines and each line consists of a tuple (name, key, nonce) such that the first N bits of the hash of the scroll from the beginning to the end of a line are all zero. As a result, to add a line to the scroll, you need to do enough computation to discover an appropriate nonce that causes the bits of the hash to be zero.
Youre describing a requirement to choose a plaintext such that a particular hash is created. While thats possible, hash algorithms are designed to make that very, very hard, or youd have an easy time finding collisions. If you can create collisions, then you have an easy time subverting the name system (or any type of crypto out there).
 
So another way of describing scenario (b) is to say that to join a network, you need a list of nodes where at least a majority are actually nodes in the network. This doesnt seem like an overly strenuous requirement.
 
In the practice of P2P networking, it is. How do you verify that they are? Let the user do that?
 
Also
 
Publishing a false scroll is equivalent to fragmenting the namespace and starting a separate network.
 
Must be prevented, or the whole thing isnt a reliable global naming thingamajig anymore.
 
And were actually slightly safer than that, since the majority needs a fair amount of CPU to stay plausible.
 
Rent a few Amazon VMs, theyre cheap these days. Or make 4chan users angry enough to help you.
 
posted by unwesen
 on January 12, 2011 #
 
I think I missed something, but I cant find the answer in the article; What is the key? It cant be an IP address, because I might be paying a third party to host my service, and that third party can be coerced.
 
I assume that I missed something, and that keys would be digital signatures, and something like the current DNS system would be used to resolve signatures into ip addresses.
 
I still have doubts about the elegance of the solution offered in the article; here is my alternative:
 
Instead of trying to invent a system in which name conflicts are impossible, allow conflicts, but use a web-of-trust system to rank human-readable names, which resolve to globally unique signatures.
 
In essence, the human name is like a nickname which is used within my peer group, while the signature is the real name which can be used to reference a person outside of my peer group.
 
Because two people in remote peer networks could use the same nickname to refer to different people, URLs would have to be resolved by the server or operating system as soon as possible, so that the name becomes globally stable.
 
To address this problem, instead of using only the human readable part, use some number of characters from the signature in the URL: . It could be that the signature is optional, otherwise it could be convention that 3 characters minimum is standard, for example. The more characters of the signature are included, the more secure the URL is - up to a maximum of the entire signature.
 
The human readable part is used to search the peer-network for candidate signatures, which can optionally be ranked by some trust-metric. (The DNS system could discard extremely untrusted names, preventing spamming.) Then, the list of candidate signatures is narrowed by however many digits of the real signature is provided. If at this point there are any conflicts, the user could be notified with an icon, but have the most-trusted option be the default.
 
The only problem is, I have used the concept of trust as a black-box ranking system.
 
posted by Phillip
 on January 12, 2011 #
 
The blog software mangled my URL scheme description.
 
In reference to my above post; domain names could be of the form: $HUMAN_READABLE.$SIGNATURE where the signature can be truncated.
 
posted by Phillip
 on January 12, 2011 #
 
There is no decentralized way to manage a global ordered list like this. Its a basic problem for P2P networks. Youll inevitably get conflicts as two nodes each publish their own amended version of the list, which then cause conflicts as they propagate gradually across the net. This is only feasible on a theoretical network with zero lag and perfect connectivity, not in the real world.
 
The ways around the problem are either
(a) Have a central synchronization mechanism to make sure entries get added in known order (which violates decentralization); or
(b) Resolve conflicts by merging divergent lists, which is made impossible by the hashing scheme (and would in any case violate security, because youre allowing arbitrary parties to edit the list.)
 
And then there are the more general problems associated with letting anyone reserve any name on a first come first served basis. You just know youre going to get spammers using their botnets to spew out entries that point every common name (dictionary words, familiar hostnames, common human names) at their sites, making the readable feature useless in practice.
 
posted by Jens Alfke
 on January 12, 2011 #
 
Jens, have you looked at bitcoin yet?  Do you believe that they are doomed to fail if/when the network size/transaction load grows large enough?  I havent looked closely yet at how they structure the network of nodes.
 
As to the first come first served  isnt that exactly how the domain system works right now?  If you are willing to steal computer time to pay for name registration under this proposal then you can just as easily steal money to pay for domains under the current DNS system.
 
posted by Emile
 on January 12, 2011 #
 
unwesen, re:hash collisions  you misread the proposal.  The idea is to find a hash where the first N bits are zero.  Choose N such that this takes an appropriate amount of work.  Your objection assumes that N == # of bits in the hash.
 
posted by Emile
 on January 12, 2011 #
 
@Emile: I did not misread the proposal, but after re-reading what Id written, I understand that it must seem that way. I had skipped a few steps in my thought process in my description.
 
Yes, finding partial collisions for plain hash functions is feasible.
 
No, using plaintext + hash(plaintext) is not enough to verify a scrolls validity, thats why HMAC etc. exist (to protect against collisions, partial or otherwise).
 
So in order for nodes to verify the scroll, youd need to find an HMAC with N leading zeros, which becomes prohibitive again.
 
The reason you must use an HMAC and not a plain hash is that, as Philip put it, avoiding conflicts () is only feasible on a theoretical network with zero lag and perfect connectivity, not in the real world.
 
Ergo, you must allow for nodes having to re-fetch and validate entire scrolls.
 
(Also, at that point you run into the problem of having too much data.)
 
Sorry for taking the shortcut through my thoughts previously, hope the above makes my objection clearer.
 
posted by unwesen
 on January 12, 2011 #
 
I find it much less clear. It doesnt seem like you understand what HMAC is.
 
As for other comments, falling behind on the scroll should be modeled as leaving the network and rejoining. If two valid lines are published within the amount of time it takes a line to propagate, the dispute will be settled by the next published line.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 12, 2011 #
 
@unwesen: I think I see the confusion?  The hashes arent being used to construct a MAC, let alone an HMAC.  They pure proofs of work.  If each line of the scroll satisfies the stated condition, then you know roughly how much work was required to generate that entire scroll.
 
The concerns that motivate HMAC as opposed to using H(key || messages) or H(message || key) to authenticate a message are not really relevant to the proposal.  We arent trying to authenticate the scroll as coming from anyone in particular.  (Proving that they have a particular secret key, and thus must have generated the MAC in question.)
 
Here, the key in each line of the scroll is just some arbitrary bit of (cleartext) data that the individual registering the name wishes to associate with it.  It is the value part of the key-value store that the proposal defines.
 
posted by Emile
 on January 12, 2011 #
 
probably best change the word nonce as it is slang for a paedo in the UK
 
posted by jon
 on January 12, 2011 #
 
Now stealing an old name is impossible, since machines in the network only add new names, they dont accept replacements for old ones.
 
Assuming for a moment that the key is the IP associated with the name, it is important that these be allowed to both expire and be replaced. If you open this door, you could use the web of trust notion to determine when a proposed replacement is valid. Im not clear on how easy it would be to tune the notion of a majority to find a balance between proliferation of data through the network and security.
 
If, however, the key is something other than the IP, there still needs to be a system underneath that translates the key to an IP address, and this is open to the triangle from Zookos paper.
 
posted by dominic
 on January 13, 2011 #
 
@Emile:
 
If hashes are pure proofs of work, then the whole system is very attackable, as CPU power is really cheap these days.
 
FWIW, theres a reason most real-world P2P systems are hybrid, and at least for the commercial ones, mechanisms to avoid bad data flooding the network is amongst the most notable.
 
posted by unwesen
 on January 13, 2011 #
 
@jon: Like it or not, nonce is the standard terminology (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_nonce).
 
posted by Tom Stuart
 on January 14, 2011 #
 
Dominic: Check out the FAQ. Theres no reason going from the key to IP would implicate any Zookos triangle issues.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 14, 2011 #
 
Just to follow up on the CPU power is really cheap, see the current Sony/PSN debacle. People with enough motivation apparently are happy to rent tons of Amazon VMs. Previously I was only assuming they would, now I know.
 
posted by unwesen
 on May 20, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January  4, 2011
 
Title: My Twitter Viewer
 
I published this on Twitter, but heres a blog post as well:
 
I made a little Twitter viewer that takes a Tweet ID (you can find them in the URL of a tweets page on twitter.com) and shows you the whole conversation for that tweet.
 
Some examples:
 
The idea is to a) make it easier to read these conversations, b) make it easier to provide replies, c) provide a permanent link to whats becoming an increasingly-important conversation space.
 
Let me know what you think.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  4, 2011
 
Excellent work.
 
posted by James
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
Great idea.  Nice.
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
Its absurd that Twitter doesnt provide this service itself.
 
posted by Carl
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
Very nice. I found myself looking for time of day on the tweets to see how much time had elapsed between the various messages.
 
posted by Jeff Clark
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
Nice work Aaron!
 
I actually built the same thing a year ago at http://twitlr.com/ but it was before the related_results method was available in the API so its very hacky and only supports a single thread.
 
Cant believe Twitter still dont provide a UI for conversation threading. The #newtwitter interface does show you the preceding tweet in a conversation but thats it. I guess theyre happy enough to let client applications implement it.
 
posted by John Blackbourn
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
Very nice.  Ive been using http://bettween.com for this, but yours is nicer.
 
posted by Ry4an
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
This is fantastic.  Thanks.
 
posted by Lawrence
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
Nice! Theres http://www.exquisitetweets.com/ which does almost exactly the same and lets you create random collections of tweets, but its a little slow sometimes due to loading lots of background images.
 
posted by Julian
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
Ive seen other services that try to do this, and all of them so far have had a fatal shortcoming: if @tom writes multiple replies to a single one of @harrys tweets, then the tool finds only one of them. So you get only a shard of the actual conversation. This is further compounded if @harry then responds to tweets from @tom that the tool didnt detect as part of the conversation. Sometimes the thread shown is so incomplete as to be completely useless.
 
Does yours handle this situation?
 
posted by Aristotle Pagaltzis
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
Its just so much work having to a.)open the time stamp link in a new tab, b.) copy the Tweet ID from the url c.) go the Twitter conversation viewer page and d.) paste the Tweet ID into the box. Couldnt you make a Fire Fox extension that I could just right click the the time stamp and select a menu item that would open a tab with the url http://twitter.theinfo.org/ appended with the Tweet ID in a new tab?
 
This is also my complaint for every time that I have used it, I get a message saying that I should complain to you.
 
But seriously, I am trying to make such an extension in my own slow way. It seems like an easy enough idea to start with. I doubt if any thing I came up with would suit anyone. However if you came up with one, you could probably make some money from ads. If not on the conversation page, from a page that would appear every time the extension was updated.
 
posted by James Hardy
 on January  5, 2011 #
 
I saw this tool mentioned on Twitter and I quite like it, Aaron.  Thanks for putting it together and making it available.
 
One immediate minor upgrade Id like to see: allow the user to supply the permalink for the tweet in question and have your software pull the Tweet ID out of that.  Far easier for a human (well, me, anyway) to be reading my twitter stream, find a tweet where Id like to see the whole conversation, right-click and copy the link, and then open your site in a new tab, say, from a bookmark.
 
I grant that your bookmarklet already does a lot of this; e.g., if I open the particular tweet in the new tab and then click your bookmarklet, but even though the first process sounds more complicated, its the more natural way I think of doing something like this.  Dont make me think, as the saying goes.
 
I agree with James Hardy above that itd be even handier to have a Firefox extension to further streamline the process, but the request Im making seems considerably quicker and easier to implement.  (Perhaps in the meantime, if youre thinking about doing more work on this.)
 
posted by bjkeefe
 on January  6, 2011 #
 
I meant to add another minor gripe I have with the bookmarklet:  Call me obsessive, but browser screen real estate is always at a premium for me, particularly vertically.  Therefore, I dislike having to have the bookmark toolbar in Firefox showing.
 
posted by bjkeefe
 on January  6, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January  3, 2011
 
Title: 2010 Review of Books
 
Previously: 2009, 2008, 2007, 2006
 
Unlinked means I recommend against getting it. Linked and italicized means its actively recommended. Linked but not italicized is somewhere in between. The ordering is not entirely accurate.
 
Secrets by Daniel Ellsberg
 
A fantastic book. Ellsberg turns out to be an incredible writer and he tells not only his own incredible story of the fight to release the Pentagon Papers (did you know the New York Times actually stole them from his house?), but, even more interestingly, recounts a great deal of fascinating personal experience about what it was like working with McNamara and Kissinger and trying to maintain your sanity in the highest levels of government.
 
With the WikiLeaks cables in the news, this book is more relevant than ever. And personally, I cant wait until Ellsbergs next book, The American Doomsday Machine, comes out. (Heres an excerpt from back when he planned to publish it online; since then Bloomsbury snapped it up.)
 
Also, be sure to check out these comments from Davies and Galbraith.
 
Bright-Sided by Barbara Ehrenreich
 
A principled opposition to positive thinking has always been a common Ehrenreich theme and here she expands it to book-length, delivering exactly what youd expect. The good news is that its trenchant and witty, the bad news is that if you read a lot of Ehrenreich you probably know just whats coming.
 
Scientist in the Crib by Allison Gopnik, Andrew N. Meltzoff, Patricia K. Kuhl
 
Gopnik et al. summarize the findings of their wave of infant research  namely that infants are trying to puzzle things out through experiments rather than just sitting there waiting for their brains to grow. Gopnik, as youd expect, is a good writer, but their attempts to link their research with philosophy are a bit strained and the research is still weak enough that the book doesnt quite feel like it pays off the title.
 
Predictably Irrational by Dan Ariely
 
Everybodys reading it, but that doesnt mean you have to. A collection of fairly mundane behavioral psychology experiments. If youre really so deluded as to believe people arent predictably irrational, its not clear to me how a mere book could possibly help you.
 
A Bee Stung Me So I Killed All The Fish [PDF] by George Saunders
 
I love Saunders. I read pretty much everything hes written this year. This collection features some of his sillier pieces.
 
The Braindead Megaphone by George Saunders
 
Saunders is great, but he hasnt quite honed his nonfiction talents the way he has with his fiction. Some fantastic pieces, some fascinating ones, and some that dont quite work.
 
Prince of the Marshes by Rory Stewart
 
I occasionally have this fantasy, while reading the news, that whatever person Im reading about has been fired and, through some miraculous fluke, I have been given their job. Would I make a hash of it? Or, would by naive mind and outsiders expertise allow me to do it in a fascinating new way?
 
In this book, Rory Stewart describes what happened when he was made a colonial governor of a province in Iraq. Brilliant fellow that he is, he does a remarkably good job all things considered, but also writes a questioning, soul-searching, fascinating book about the experience that highlights what an impossible task it really is.
 
False Profits: Recovering from the Bubble Economy by Dean Baker
 
A short, clear book on why the economy failed, who did it, and how to set it right by someone who was absolutely right about it all along. If you only want to read one book about the economic crisis, this would be an excellent choice.
 
The Accidental Theorist by Paul Krugman
 
A collection of Krugmans columns for Slate. It was before he really came off his neoliberal high, but after he learned to write, so while theyre not always right theyre almost always delightful (and Slate gave him a lot more freedom to be playful than the Times does). A very fun book about a wide range of issues in economics. (Heres a nice review from Brad DeLong.)
 
The Political Brain by Drew Westen
 
A decent book that could have been great if it had a real editor. There are really three things in here: 1) some fantastic examples of what Democrats should say if they have any spine (theyre the kind of political propaganda Lakoff would write if Lakoff could write political propaganda), 2) some pretty bogus fMRI experiments to give the text in (1) the illusion of being backed in hard science, 3) several hundred pages of pointless rambling and repetition. If only an editor could have at least removed (3).
 
Get Out The Vote by Donald Green and Alan Gerber
 
Every year, thousands of Americans head out onto the streets to knock on their neighbors doors and remind them to vote. Does any of it have any effect? Green and Gerber had the bright idea of running an experiment to see: Randomize the houses and ask the canvassers to knock on half of them and ignore the other half. Then, check the voting records (which are public) to see how many people in each group voted. The difference can tell you if you made a difference.
 
This brilliant idea sparked a whole field of experimental research about getting out the vote, which Green and Gerber summarize in this short book, aimed at some mix of scientists and political professionals.
 
Eating the Dinosaur by Chuck Klosterman
 
Absolutely fantastic. Could hardly put it down. Chuck Klosterman is definitely in the running for greatest living essayist. The book is a collection of essays, but not, as far as I can tell, essays that were ever published anywhere else. Theyre each just magical gems that fit together just perfectly. I even liked the stuff about football (and Ive never seen a game of football).
 
I liked this so much I went on to read all his other books in reverse chronological order:
 
Chuck Klosterman IV by Chuck Klosterman
 
Great, but not quite as great.
 
Killing Yourself in Order to Live by Chuck Klosterman
 
Merely interesting.
 
Sex, Drugs, and Cocoa Puffs by Chuck Klosterman
 
Pretty good.
 
But I could not read either Downtown Owl (his novel) or Fargo Rock City. The rest I couldnt put down. I guess start with Eating the Dinosaur and see how far you get.
 
Doubt is Their Product by David Michaels
 
There are a vast array of government agencies, like the EPA and OSHA, whose job is to protect Americans by examining the science and outlawing things that hurt people. But what if the bad guys get to make up the science? David Michaels examines the whole industry of scientists-for-hire that try to manufacture doubt about the harms that big business commits. The title comes from a tobacco company memo and the tobacco companies are infamous for trying to shed doubt on the studies attacking their products, but the tactics they invented have now spread to every little chemical additive.
 
Michaels is now head of OSHA. On the one hand, its great that such a corporate critic has such an influential position. On the other hand, this book is written in the style youd expect from someone who could become head of OSHA: its cautious, not polemical, and obsessed with proving the details, rather than the bigger picture.
 
Why Not Socialism? by G.A. Cohen
 
A great little book from the late philosopher Jerry Cohen. Not quite as great as his comments about the shmoos, but a wonderful (and, sadly, all too rare) attempt to get people thinking about what socialism really means and whether it would be practical.
 
Free Schools by Jonathan Kozol
 
An angry little book not about how bad the school system is, like Kozols usual beat, but about the people trying to change it. Both the folks, like Kozol, going into the inner city and trying to start new schools and the others running away to the land to frolic in freedom. Certainly a time capsule from the 1970s, but a fascinating one.
 
Making Movies by Sidney Lumet
 
A fairly self-absorbed book about what it means to make a movie. Some decent details about the practicalities in here, but mixed in with a lot of random musing and personal reflection.
 
The Persistence of Poverty by Charles Karelis
 
I feel like Ive written so much about this book, but none of it appears to have made it to this blog. A great little book, just enough to explain one big idea and how it overturns what you think about classical economics and poverty and much else besides. Heres a quick bit from Matt Yglesias on it.
 
Caught Between Two Worlds: The Diary of a Lowell Mill Girl
 
Mill by David Macaulay
 
I dont understand why everyone loves Macaulay so.
 
Belles of New England
 
The Industrial Worker by Norman Ware
 
A fascinating history about how mill girls and shoemakers invented socialism and fought for it in the early days of the republic, before Jeffersons dream of independent men was crushed by the onslaught of industrialization.
 
Acme Novelty Library, #19 by Chris Ware
 
Chris Ware is magic. This book consists mostly of a chapter from the work-in-progress Rusty Brown, which I was initially skeptical about, but turns out to be just amazingly great. And Building Stories is incredible too.
 
Wares method is to publish a page each week or so in a weekly paper (the Sunday New York Times, the Chicago Reader), then redraw the entire chapter and send it out as an edition of the Novelty Library, then redraw it a third time when the entire book is published. So this is a way of getting intermediate results, but you could just wait for the final books themselves (if they are ever finished).
 
The Art of Lobbying by Bertram Levine
 
A guide by a practitioner, for practitioners. Not great, but you can pick up a little bit of the flavor of the job from reading what the insiders say.
 
Making the Social World: The Structure of Human Civilization by John Searle
 
Brilliant. My review is here.
 
The Spirit Level: Why Greater Equality Makes Societies Stronger by Wilkinson and Pickett
 
Not as good as I was hoping, but still a compelling case for equality with a vast array of data.
 
Women at Work
 
Loom and Spindle by Harriet Jane Hanson Robinson
 
A fantastic memoir of a fantastic time. Shows how radical even the moderate mill girls were.
 
Priceless: The Myth of Fair Value and How to Take Advantage of It by William Poundstone
 
Poundstone is one of the great science writers of all time. Here he takes on behavioral economics at the very top of his game. Full of fascinating ideas.
 
Influence by Robert Cialdini
 
Covers the usual results of the science on persuasion in a decent and clear way.
 
Education and the Cult of Efficiency by Raymond E. Callahan
 
Proof that business has been trying to take over education for over a century.
 
On Writing by Stephen King
 
Nothing earth-shattering, but it turns out Stephen King is actually a good writer. I honestly had no idea.
 
Schooling in Capitalist America (reread) by Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis
 
The best book on the real meaning of school.
 
Becoming Attached (reread) by Robert Karen
 
One of my favorite books of all time. Probably the best work of science writing Ive ever read.
 
Moral Politics (reread) by George Lakoff
 
The best book on American politics.
 
Unconditional Parenting (reread) by Alfie Kohn
 
How Children Fail (reread) by John Holt
 
An amazing book on education.
 
The Lobbyists by Jeffrey Birnbaum
 
Dumbing Us Down by John Taylor Gatto
 
Winning Your Election the Wellstone Way by Jeff Blodgett and Bill Lofy and others
 
Really just a more-detailed version of Politics the Wellstone Way.
 
Bonfire of the Vanities by Tom Wolfe
 
Absolutely fantastic. A rare must-read novel  packed full of information about society, journalism, activism, race, etc. I cant convey just how good it really is. Its like The Power Broker of fiction.
 
The Checklist Manifesto by Atul Gawande
 
Not a bad book by any means, but its constrained focus means its not quite as thrilling as Gawandes other books. It ends up mostly being a series of stories about how great checklists can be. Checklists are interesting, but theyre a very small piece of the institutional change that this book should really be about. You get a few hints at other pieces through the well-researched examples, but theyre only hints.
 
The Revisionists Revised by Diane Ravitch
 
Eminently skimmable  Ravitch barely even tries to mount an argument. Instead she just sort of fumes for a hundred pages or so at the radical scholars who dared to point out the invention of school wasnt so nobly motivated. Well, shes come a long way  now shes basically one of them. (See this piece on her reversal.)
 
Free at Last: The Sudbury Valley School by Daniel Greenberg
 
Sudbury has some aspects of magic and nothing conveys them better than this book.
 
Learning all the Time by John Holt
 
Political Polling by Jeffrey Stonecash
 
Has some decent stuff on the business side of things  how to write polling reports and get clients and so on.
 
The Big Short by Michael Lewis
 
Oh, what to say about this book? Its well-written, as youd expect, though no knockout. It tells a fascinating story about some aspects of the crisis, but goes far from unravelling the whole thing.
 
How to Win Friends and Influence People (reread) by Dale Carnegie
 
Theres a reason this is a classic. It articulates a way of dealing with people, founded on concern and empathy, and convincingly argues that this kind style is actually the more productive one for getting things done. Instead of yelling at people to do things, you make them want to help you. And the book itself is a genius exemplar of this practice. Instead of berating you for being a jerk, like most people would, it persuades you to want to change.
 
The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks by Rebecca Skloot
 
Everyone has praised this book, and for good reason  it deftly interweaves an incredible story of science with the heartbreaking tragedy of the people science studies. Nothing earthshattering, but a great piece of writing.
 
The Design of Design by Fred Brooks
 
No deep lasting insights, but it is fascinating to watch Brooks struggle with these questions and it helps you struggle as well.
 
[REDACTED]
 
The Case Against Standardized Tests by Alfie Kohn
 
If you need more reasons to hate standardized tests, this book is full of them.
 
When You Were a Tadpole and I Was a Fish by Martin Gardner
 
In memoriam. In the same way that the spirit of Lenny Bruce passed through Bill Hicks and now Louis CK, the ghost of Feynman passed to Martin Gardner. His wit and curiosity, combined with a gift for explanation, did more than almost anyone to promote a genuine appreciation for math and science. This essay collection was his last book. (Although Im sure many, many more will come posthumously.)
 
Class War?: What Americans Really Think about Economic Inequality by Benjamin Page and Lawrence Jacobs
 
If the state of politics gets you down about your fellow man, this well-researched scientific book will persuade you that even Americans are egalitarians at heart.
 
Getting to Yes by Roger Fisher and William Ury
 
This book is full of alternate strategies to try, but has very little on the key negotiation question of what to do about distributing the surplus.
 
Expert Political Judgment by Philip Tetlock
 
This book is kind of a bore to read, but the story it tells is fascinating, so just read Louis Menands summary instead.
 
101 Things I Learned in Business School by Michael W. Preis with Matthew Frederick
 
A sweet, short book with cute pictures. Smart idea for a series.
 
The Way We Were? [online] by Richard Rothstein
 
A fantastic debunking of the kids were so much smarter back then myth.
 
The Matthew Effect by Daniel Rigney
 
Short and unmemorable.
 
Taking Economic Seriously by Dean Baker
 
A nice little summary of Deans big ideas.
 
The Meaning of David Cameron by Richard Seymour
 
A short book on whats happened to British politics from a radical perspective.
 
Managing to Change the World by Allison Green and Jerry Hauser
 
The best book on the practicalities of management Ive ever read. Whereas most books focus on vague and meaningless advice, this book is clear about the nuts and bolts.
 
Workers in a Labyrinth by Robert Jackall
 
Not as great as my favorite book of all-time, Jackalls Moral Mazes, but a fascinating look at how normal people make sense of their daily work lives.
 
Disconnect by Morris Fiorina
 
Fiorina has no idea what hes talking about in this one; its completely ridiculous. There was a long period in American politics where, to prevent blacks from voting, southern whites excluded blacks from the Democratic party primary and then always voted for the Democratic nominee in the general. Blacks could legally vote, but only in the general, when it didnt make any difference.
 
The result was that a whole lot of racist, conservative politicians ended up in the Democratic Party and so politics appeared less polarized  there were conservatives Democrats (and some liberal Republicans) and the conservatives and the liberals could work across party lines to get things done.
 
Eventually the Supreme Court outlawed this noxious practice and the south started sending Republicans to Congress instead. That led to the conservatives leaving the Democratic party  (and then the liberal Republicans getting kicked out too) and now when liberals or conservatives all work together, they only need to do so within one party. The result is what appears to be an increase in party polarization. Instead of a couple Democratic liberals and a couple Republican liberals writing a bill, you just get a bunch of Democratic liberals writing a bill.
 
This is such an obvious explanation and MoFi does his best to ignore it, looking everywhere but the obvious place so he can wonder about the dangers of polarization.
 
The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo (1 of 3) by Stieg Larsson
 
This book has no deep point to make, Nora Ephron has ably chronicled its stylistic oddities, and the plot is more bizarre than compelling. Yet I couldnt put it down. Indeed, I dare say I enjoyed it.
 
The Girl who Played with Fire (2 of 3) by Stieg Larsson
 
The Girl who Kicked Over the Hornets Nest (3 of 3) by Stieg Larsson
 
These two tell a different, and in some ways more interesting story than the first one, but its not enough to change my fundamental evaluation.
 
However, I do much prefer the original titles, which translate roughly to: Men Who Hate Women, The Girl Who Played with Fire, and The Exploding Social Safety Net. I guess its nice when that sort of thing can be a bestseller.
 
The Possessed: Adventures with Russian Books and the People Who Read Them by Elif Batuman
 
Hilarious, brilliant, fantastic. Theres no justification for this book being as good as it is. Even I wasnt interested in reading a book about Russian literary scholars, but its just incredible good and Im glad I did.
 
This is Your Country on Drugs by Ryan Grim
 
I would not have thought the world needed another book on drugs, but this one turns out to be basically perfect. Comprehensive, erudite, funny, and realistic  Grim definitely inhales.
 
Scott Pilgrims Precious Little Life (1 of 6) by Bryan Lee OMalley
 
Scott Pilgrims Finest Hour (6 of 6) by Bryan Lee OMalley
 
You should definitely see the movie and then, if you do see it, its worth reading the books. The books are much deeper and darker than the movie otherwise lets on. You realize that the film you saw as an example of joy and exuberance is actually incredibly depressing.
 
By contrast, we will just forget that someone made a movie of Bonfire of the Vanities. Yeek.
 
Rework by Jason Fried and David Heinemeier Hansson
 
Delivering Happiness by Tony Hsieh
 
This book is more the story of Hsiehs insane journey toward creating Zappos than the business advice book it looks like, but thats OK because its an incredible story and Hsiehs exuberant retelling makes it impossible to put down.
 
Meta Math! by Gregory Chaitin
 
Chaitin makes an obscure field youve never heard of like Algorithmic Information Theory sound interesting and fun, even if you dont know any math.
 
Philosophy in a New Century by John Searle
 
A collection of some great essays by Searle.
 
The Essential Drucker by Peter Drucker
 
Drucker sounds like the kind of person I should like, but Ive never actually liked him.
 
Socks by Beverly Cleary
 
Ramona the Brave by Beverly Cleary
 
I read these to the seven-year-old, at her insistence. They werent great, but they were at least tolerable, unlike some of the other stuff she likes.
 
XKCD, vol. 0 by Randall Munroe
 
You no doubt already read xkcd online. Yet apparently many people also bought this paper copy. And they said print was dead!
 
The Promise: President Obama, Year One by Jonathan Alter
 
No great revelations, but it is shocking how little actual thought goes on in the Obama White House.
 
Microeconomics by Samuel Bowles
 
A textbook that totally upends the field of classical economics. Sadly, it can be a bit hard to follow, but I wrote summaries of it here.
 
All Art is Propaganda: Critical Essays by George Orwell (with introduction by Keith Gessen)
 
Orwell is magic.
 
Toyota Production System by Taiichi Ohno
 
Its hard to find a better book that describes what lean production, in its original sense, is all about than this translated work from its creator. I hope that Ohno one day gets the recognition he deserves: as one of the worlds first pioneers in what is undoubtedly the greatest human art form (with sex running a close second).
 
Freedom by Jonathan Franzen
 
Flashes of greatness mixed with strings of ridiculousness. (This is Franzens Great American Novel, in case you hadnt heard.) Could have been truly great if Franzen had a great editor, but instead all his indulgences were left in. Its certainly no competition for DFW. (Sorry, Franzen!)
 
The Machine that Changed the World: The Story of Lean ProductionToyotas Secret Weapon in the Global Car Wars That Is Now Revolutionizing World Industry by James P. Womack, Daniel T. Jones, and Daniel Roos
 
Not bad, but feels a bit like reading a book by a bunch of blind men trying to explain the elephant charging toward them.
 
Conscience of a Liberal by Paul Krugman
 
Did I really read this book? I dont remember it at all.
 
How to Become a Scandal by Laura Kipnis
 
Kipnis writing is fun, as always, but theres no real insight here.
 
Poisoned for Pennies: The Economics of Toxics and Precaution by Frank Ackerman
 
A fantastic book on the serious trouble with using mathematical cost-benefit analyses to try to decide when to protect the environment.
 
Exit, Voice, and Loyalty by Albert O. Hirschman
 
A disappointment. Perhaps all its insights have become common knowledge since then.
 
REDACTED
 
Beyond the Hoax by Alan Sokal
 
Alan Sokal returns again with a book collecting and integrating his papers on the philosophy of science (although there is still some repetition). Sokals clear thinking on difficult philosophical issues is always appreciated, but this time around Im convinced that hes wrong about the Edinburgh set. The rest of it is great, though, especially if you havent read it before. (Theres also some good newish stuff too, including some stuff about Prophets Facing Backward.)
 
Dancing in the Streets: A History of Collective Joy by Barbara Ehrenreich
 
Ehrenreich makes a convincing case for the ecstatic tradition in American life. My only regret is that it lacks a chapter on raves.
 
The Mind-Body Problem by Rebecca Goldstein
 
A nice book about the problem with marrying a genius. See also: the film Whatever Works.
 
REDACTED
 
The $12 Million Stuffed Shark: The Curious Economics of Contemporary Art by Don Thompson
 
This is another book about a weird subject that goes into too much detail. Thompson gives a decent overview of the art market, but then spends too much time getting into obscure detail about the people involved. Modern art sure is weird, though.
 
The Cartoon Introduction to Economics by Grady Klein and Yoram Bauman
 
Funny (especially the intro) and some basic economics, but nothing stupendous on either front.
 
When Brute Force Fails by Mark A. R. Kleiman
 
A fantastic book. More gushing in my review.
 
Money for Nothing by John Gillespie and David Zweig
 
A quick read on why corporate boards suck so very much.
 
HaPenny (2 of 3) by Jo Walton
 
Half a Crown (3 of 3) by Jo Walton
 
A good fun detective story combined with interesting speculative fiction. (I read the first book, Farthing, years ago.)
 
Reason and Rationality by Jon Elster
 
Very, very short.
 
An Object of Beauty by Steve Martin
 
More on the art market. Martin is not a bad novelist, considering everything else he is, but I doubt I would have read the book if it had a different authors name on the cover.
 
Shopgirl by Steve Martin
 
Turns out to be basically the same book, except much creepier since you realize Martins basically just using the book to work through his guilt about screwing over younger women.
 
Good to Great by Jim Collins
 
Most business books consist of a bunch of wacky ideas dressed up with even wackier names and presented as the Next Big Thing. Jim Collins greatly improves the genre, by replacing the wacky ideas with actual science. (Unfortunately, he continues the tradition of wacky names.)
 
Collins and his team picked out all Fortune 500 companies that sustained 4x market returns for more than 15 years (the great companies) and went back to find the transition point where they went from earning normal-market returns to their 4x returns. Then they found the most similar company at that transition point and used it as a control. They examined what differed between the great companies and the controls and describe it here. Of course, you have to trust Collins to pick out the right lessons, but the ones he chooses seem like very good ones.
 
Good to Great and the Social Sector by Jim Collins
 
A short little appendix describing how to apply these principles to non-profits.
 
Built to Last by Jim Collins and Jerry Porras
 
This book is very similar to Good to Great except it uses even worse science and even worse names. (Clock building? Really? Cant we just call it institution building?) Just read Good to Great  the important stuff from this book is presented in its last chapter anyway.
 
Beyond Entrepreneurship by Jim Collins and William C. Lazier
 
This book has pretty much no science (although fewer silly names as well). Its just a lazier version of Built to Last.
 
You Lost Me There by Rosencrans Baldwin
 
I knew Rosencrans had a novel out, but I was shocked to see it at the checkout counter. But its great!
 
Bigfoot: I Not Dead by Graham Roumieu
 
Not funny.
 
The Thick of It: The Missing DoSAC Files by the writers of The Thick of It
 
Not that funny. (The Thick of It is one of the top 5 great TV shows of all-time, though.)
 
The Lifecycle of Software Objects [online] by Ted Chiang
 
Read it! Even people who know much more about sci-fi than me agree this is one of the great science fiction books of all time. Its a novel about the ethical issues with AI.
 
Dr. Horrible and Other Horrible Stories by Zack Whedon
 
Definitely funny, though not as great as the show.
 
Wrestling With Moses by Anthony Flint
 
A decent attempt at a biography of Jane Jacobs, though I would have wanted more detail on how she actually did what she did. Caro he is not  either in writing or research.
 
Short: Walking Tall When Youre Not Tall At All by John Schwartz
 
Surely youve heard about the studies showing short people dont make as much as tall people. John Schwartz set out to write a book to cheer kids up about this fact, but looking into them he found it wasnt a fact at all. The result is a model of self-help through science and media criticism. Schwartz playfully teaches you enough math and science to be able to debunk the studies and enough personal advice to make a life on your own terms.
 
Disclosures: I know Rory Stewart, Dean Baker, John Schwartz, Ryan Grim, Randall Munroe, and Charles Karelis. Baker and Karelis provided me with free copies. Ryan Grim and John Schwartz have written about me in other forums.
 
In the future, I think I should probably do this monthly instead of one huge yearly installment.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  3, 2011
 
Cant help but feel that your list is missing lots of obvious choices!
 
posted by Bryan
 on January  3, 2011 #
 
Hm, youre a bit short of the promised 2,010 reviews.
 
posted by greg
 on January  3, 2011 #
 
:) Demanding progress can keep you busy.
 
posted by Randall
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
For #17-Why Not Socialism? by G.A. Cohen- is all too-rate (and, sadly, all-too-rate) a typo for all-too-rare or all-too-late? Reading anyone or about anything else I would just assume a typo for the first, but Ive been thinking it is too late for the most ideal social order and the fight is going to have to be about how to down size the beast rather any (too easily co-optable) revolutionary happening.
 
posted by James Hardy
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
I changed it to all too rare. I havent given up on the big picture yet.
 
Also, the first three comments are jokes  because my CMS choked on such a long post, originally this entry was just blank.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
A working A Bee Stung Me Link is http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/static/chapbook.pdf .
 
(abeestungme.pdf is the log of wget fetching chapbook.pdf.  Boo wget for not acting like curl.)
 
And evince shows its pages in an odd order, but that ones beyond me.
 
Will try and munch through some italic ones, but man, I do not read as fast as some. :)
 
posted by Randall
 on January  4, 2011 #
 
Thanks, Aaron.
 
posted by Bob Erb
 on January  5, 2011 #
 
The Jim Collins books are entertaining but misleading. Phil Rosenzweig debunks all his work (and similar studies) in The Halo Effect. And Rosenzweig is far wittier as well. http://www.amazon.com/Halo-Effect-Business-Delusions-Managers/dp/0743291255
 
posted by Dave Bridgeland
 on January  5, 2011 #
 
Go quarterly/seasonal, if you feel that annually is too long a period.
 
Id be surprised if a monthly report didnt become rote and burdensome. Plus, some distance is good. (Did I read this at all? I dont remember it. is a useful review.)
 
posted by Dan Connolly
 on January  7, 2011 #
 
Hm. I didnt really love William Poundstone  the science was interesting, but I felt like he spent a lot of time proving things that seem obvious (we cant make rational decisions), and didnt actually illuminate much.
 
While I was reading it, however, I also read a book called I.O.U.: why everyone owes everyone and no one can pay by John Lanchester. Its a very, very good book, and a good breakdown of the 08 economic disaster. I really recommend it.
 
posted by Christopher J Michel
 on January  7, 2011 #
 
Thanks Aaron! Ive placed a library hold on four of the titles youve italicized, and am picking up two other titles today!
 
posted by Ben
 on January  8, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: December 21, 2010
 
Title: A Censorship-Resistant Web
 
Imagine someone put a document up at http://pentagonpapers.com/volumes/1.html that a) some people want to read and b) some people want to keep you from reading.
 
On the current Web, the way you request such a document is like this:
 
The censors can ask VeriSign to give them control of pentagonpapers.com, they can try to shut down Acme ISP, they can try to prevent you from getting hosting, and they can try to shut down your IP. All of these have been used recently, with some success. You need a backup plan.
 
Lets imagine we want this URL to resolve in an uncensorable way. How would we do it?
 
First we would have a certificate authority (CA) which would sign statements of the form: As of [DATE], [DOMAIN NAME] is owned by the holder of [PUBLIC KEY]. (Lets call this a certificate.) Conveniently, theres already a whole industry of trusted businesses that make these statements  theyre called SSL certificates.
 
The problem is that CAs are presumably just as subject to attack as the registrars (in fact, in some cases they are the registrars!). One possibility is to set up a certificate authority that will not sign such statements for people attempting to engage in censorship. It seems probable that such a policy would be protected by the First Amendment in the US. However, people engaging in censorship is a somewhat subjective notion. Also, its always possible a court could order the certificate authority to turn over the private signing key (or the key could be obtained in some other way).
 
Another possibility is some kind of rollback UI. If you know vaguely when the censorship attempts started, you can only trust certifications made before that date. This is a somewhat difficult feature to implement in a way that makes sense to users, though. The best case scenario is one in which the user can clearly distinguish between a censored and uncensored page. In that case, if the page appears censored they can hit a go back a month button and the system will only trust certifications made more than a month prior to the certification its currently using. The user can hit this button repeatedly until they get an uncensored version of the page.
 
Next the owner of the website will need to sign statements of the form The content of [URL] had the hash [HASH] on [DATE]. (Lets call this an authenticator.) Now given a page, a corresponding valid authenticator, and a corresponding valid certificate (call this trio an authentic page), browsers can safely display a page even if it cant access the actual web server. The digital signatures work together to prove that the page is what the website owner wanted to publish. If a browser gets back multiple authentic pages, it can display the latest one (modulo the effects of the go back a month button).
 
Set up a series of domain-to-certificate servers. These servers take a domain names (e.g. pentagonpapers.com) and returns back any certificates for it. Certificates can be obtained by crawling the Web or by being submitted by website owners or by being submitted by the CAs themselves.
 
Set up a series of URL-to-hash servers. These servers take a URL and return back any valid authenticators for that URL. Authenticators are very small, so each URL-to-hash server can probably store all of them. If spam becomes a problem, a little bit of hashcash could be required for storage. Website owners submit their authenticators to the URL-to-hash servers.
 
Set up a series of hash-to-URL servers. These servers take a hash and return a series of URLs which can be dereferenced in the normal way to obtain a file with that hash. People can submit hash-to-URL mappings to these servers and they can attempt to automatically verify them by downloading the file and seeing if the hash matches.12 Again, these mappings are very small so each server can probably store all of them.3
 
Then there are a series of servers that host controversial files. Perhaps they saved a copy before the site was censored, perhaps they received it thru some out-of-band channel4. However they got it, they put them up on their website and then submit the URL to the hash-to-URL servers. Meanwhile, the site publisher submits an authenticator to the URL-to-hash servers.
 
Now, if a browser cannot obtain the pentagonpapers page through normal means it can:
 
This can be implemented through a browser plugin that you click when a page appears to be unavailable. If it takes off, maybe it can be built in to browsers. (While Ive been assuming the worst-case-scenario of censorship here, the system would be equally useful for sites that are just down because their servers couldnt handle the load or some other innocent failure.)
 
This system should work unless our adversary can censor every well-known CA, every well-known URL-to-hash server, every well-known hash-to-URL server, or every alternative URL.
 
We can help ensure this by operating at least one of each as a Tor hidden service. Because the operator of the service is anonymous, they are immune to legal threats.6 If the user doesnt have Tor, they can access them through tor2web.org.
 
Similarly, if you know your document is going to get censored, you can skip steps 1 and 2. Instead of distributing a pentagonpapers.com URL which is going to go down, you can just distribute the hash. For users whose browsers dont support this system, you can embed the hash in a URL like:
 
where hash2url.org is a hash-to-URL server that redirects you to a valid URL.
 
And, of course, if you somehow have access to a working P2P system, you can just it to obtain authentic pages.
 
Whats nice about this system is that it gets you censorship resistance without introducing anything wildly new. There are already certificate authorities. There are already hash-to-URL servers. There are already mirrors. Theres already Tor. (Theres already tor2web.) The only really new thing specific to censorship resistance is URL-to-hash servers of the form I described, but theyre very simple and hopefully uncontroversial.
 
There is some work to be done stitching all of these together and improving the UI, but unlike with some other censorship-resistance systems, theres nothing you can point to as having no good purpose except for helping bad guys. Its all pretty basic and generally useful stuff, just put together in a new way.
 
If youre interested in helping build something like this, please send me an email: me@aaronsw.com.
 
Any server will have finite bandwidth, so an attacker could try to fool the hash-to-URL server by submitting a URL which when dereferenced never stops sending the data. The hash-to-URL servers should stop after a certain limit and mark the URL as unverified due to max file size. If the server ever obtains a file whose size is under the limit with that hash, it can toss all such URLs.
 
URLs can go out of date so perhaps upon receiving sufficient complaints about a URL being bad, the server should attempt to reverify. Again, hashcash can be used throughout to avoid spam.
 
A possible protocol for the above two servers is provided in RFC 2169.
 
I have ideas on how to automate this, naturally, but this essay is already far too long.
 
Optional bonus: Use HTTP Range headers to download 1/n of the file from each of the n URLs. There are some circumstances where this could speed things up. Or maybe its just annoying.
 
This moves the censorship weak link to the distribution of introduction points to hidden services.7 But instead of being published by a DHT, introduction points can be distributed through a flood protocol8. Or maybe the DHT can be modified so that theres no obvious censorship point?
 
The introduction points themselves cant be censored because they dont know who theyre talking to. (I think they do in the current implementation of Tor, but this doesnt seem necessary. The hidden service can generate a new keypair for each introduction point and send the public key to the introduction point and to Alice.)
 
Is this too chatty? Probably. But remember, its a last-case resort in some kind of insane police-state world where every country prevents people from running servers that give out the IP addresses of other servers that let you talk to a third server which will give you illegal content.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 21, 2010
 
I also got thinking about what you do when there are lots of potential takedown points.  I was thinking one handy piece could be a client-side piece  a few static files that anybody can put on a server constitute a program that 1) tries a bunch of directory servers to find where a file with a particular hash is stored, 2) tries to download and check the hash of the file at each location, 3) displays the winner, the first document that hashes to the right value.  (That takes cross-domain communication and crypto in JavaScript, but both are possible these days.)  The handy thing is that the client piece can be hosted anywhere trivially, without hosting the actual censored content.  The client could also come with a list of some hashes for interesting documents and some places to look for them.
 
Or a simpler version of that would be just one page that looks through a hardcoded list of URLs for a page whose contents authenticate, i.e., one that isnt down yet.  Just saves the user the trouble of testing a list of mirrors by hand, but thats a real win when users want to find stuff easily.
 
Your system lets the publisher update the page, including when the update content isnt known beforehand  e.g., when its breaking news instead of the next volume of the Pentagon Papers.  Thats harder to solve with a document-hash-based system, but possible; you need to authenticate that the update is also by the original author.  If the original document contains the authors public key, or a hash of it, or a hash used for a one-time Lamport signature, you can use that.
 
(Not trying to argue about the merits of the two systems.  One clear advantage of a system without a heavy client side is that it doesnt depend on the vagaries of the client platform (i.e., it runs on IE6).  Just spelling out what Id been thinking about when I read this.)
 
posted by Randall
 on December 23, 2010 #
 
You might want to look at content-based addressing. The idea is that whenever we want to put information on the web, we take the document and take a 128-bit (or larger) hash of said document. Then that hash is the permanent reference. if anybody wants to retrieve this document, they submit this hash to a retrieval service. Authenticity is obtained by hashing and availability is guaranteed by having lots of retrieval services. Name > Hash can be implemented in the system itself (by making a root-document style of entry - essentially a directory structure).
 
Van Jacobson is doing some work in this space: pages.cs.wisc.edu/~akella/CS838/F09/838-Papers/ccn.pdf
 
posted by Prakhar Goel
 on December 23, 2010 #
 
True censorship will happen the day it becomes illegal to try to access censored data
 
There might be countries where this is already occuring.
 
posted by JeanHuguesRobert
 on December 23, 2010 #
 
My bets on some voluntary cloud botnet as the truly independent and practically invulnerable hosting platform.
 
posted by Ursus
 on December 23, 2010 #
 
You can easily overcome the CA point of failure by using history based trust model (CAs are part of a delegation of authority trust model)
 
How do you do that? By basing your censorship circumvention system on a builtin social network. This way you put trust in the right entities : identities (people). Not content and not arbitrarly chosen authorities.
 
Ill send you an email.
 
posted by Slim Amamou
 on December 23, 2010 #
 
This is something search engines should do automatically.  Google could easily compute the secure hash of every page it crawls and provide automatic links to mirrors (defined as pages with the same secure hash) of pages that are no longer available (or just under high load).  It could even provide an indication of how complete a mirror is by the percentage of files linked to by the original domain are also present (and match the secure has) at the mirror.
 
A very similar service exists now in the form of URL shortening services.  It would not require much work to implement one-to-many relationships between the shortened versions of URLs and the mirrors of the content.  Automatic detection of mirrors could be accomplished by keeping hashes of the original content and comparing any new URL submitted for shortening to the hash database and merging detected mirrors into one shortened URL.  A recursive hash tree would be necessary to prevent spoofed mirrors, and a reverse lookup added for users who know the original URL but cant access the site because it is down or censored.
 
The only thing missing from either of these descriptions is a notion of authoritative publishing, e.g. detecting when an original URL points to an updated, but authoritative, site and the mirrors arent updated yet.  In this case, it would clearly have been in everyones best interest if the web had been designed with signed content from the beginning.  If a suitable standard could be found for signing the content of web pages (even something as simple as dropping index.html.gpg, image1.jpg.gpg or a collective MD5SUMS.gpg into the webroot), mirror detection services could automatically recognize newer authoritative content by a newer signature date.  Mirrors of signed content would be identified by a common set of public keys used to sign their content, and when an update occurred it would be recognized that the mirrors no longer matching the content are still mirrors, but simply out of sync.  This would prevent the ability of attackers to spam old mirror content or otherwise attempt to add mirrors with disinformation.
 
I think your scheme could be extended to support OpenPGP signatures in addition to (and maybe in preference over) hashes plus SSL certificates.  The publisher would publish a signature of the contents of a URL instead of just a hash of a URL.  A hash is still included in the signature for the purpose of uniquely identifying content, but it is tied to a publisher.  This would not require additional trusted SSL certificates for mirrors, just the presence of the signed content on any mirror sites.
 
There are still attacks possible where lots of rogue mirrors are published with a different key in an attempt to steal the authenticity of all mirror sites away from the original publisher.  Basically the only way to circumvent such a situation is with a web of trust like PGP implements.  Take a situation where wikileaks is completely censored and forced offline.  At this point any number of mirrors may exist but it is now impossible to tell which may be being updated by the real wikileaks crew and which may be subverted.  If a majority of mirrors (which includes many fakes created by attackers) start to publish new information, there is no way to tell with SSL certs alone whether the updates should be trusted.  This is kind of a far fetched attack, but it makes sense to avoid any potential weaknesses during the design phase.  Provisions for recognizing revoked PGP keys should also be in place for the case where publishers know they will be arrested/interrogated/subverted and further updates with their key should not be trusted.
 
posted by Ben
 on December 23, 2010 #
 
Youve got the right idea, but this bothers me:
Conveniently, theres already a whole industry of trusted businesses that make these statements  theyre called SSL certificates.
Can we really trust any businesses in this scenario?
 
You should look at Freenet; its doing something very similar already. You discover nearby nodes and when you want to retrieve a file (by hash), you ask them if they have it. If they dont, they ask someone else, and relay it back to you. This means theres no way to tell if someone is downloading the file for themselves or just passing it along.
 
Each node may keep copies of some of the content as well, deleting old files that havent been requested in some time - so there are many copies of every file floating around, disappearing only when nobody wants them anymore. Since the files are encrypted (part of the URL serves as the key), the nodes cant tell what is in the files they decide to keep, so they cant try to censor or alter anything and cant be prosecuted for keeping it.
 
posted by 
 on December 23, 2010 #
 
Separate from censorship-resistance, this system would also allow ad-hoc p2p caching of content  to handle traffic surges or provide a level of anonymized viewing.
 
The domain names seem to be like handy pet names for certificates. The proposed tdb: URI scheme could prove useful for referring to expired mappings of domain->cert or URI->content. (tdb seems to have subsumed duri in Masinters latest draft: http://larry.masinter.net/duri.html )
 
A URI scheme giving every signing-key its own path-like namespace could also be useful, as with the hypothesized kau and other schemes we discussed in this 2002 thread:
 
http://notabug.com/zest/p2p-hackers/msg00048.html
 
posted by Gordon Mohr
 on December 23, 2010 #
 
Good luck. But Ive seen so many This-Time-For-Sure sorts of these systems that I now put them in the same general class as perpetual motion machines.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on December 24, 2010 #
 
You have described Freenet to a T.
 
posted by James
 on December 24, 2010 #
 
Re: James and Seth  meh, I say, meh!
 
Freenet, Tor, and DHTs seem pretty hard to censor but involve a lot of work for end users.  Unsolved problem seems to be to make a way to find censored content that just requires the end user to hit a locator URL (maybe at one of many domains), gives the locator services some separation from the actual content hosts (making it safer to host a locator), and is pretty resilient when content hosts go down.
 
posted by Randall
 on December 25, 2010 #
 
Another similar project from ten years ago was Publius:
 
http://cs.nyu.edu/~waldman/publius/
 
posted by Jim Lippard
 on December 26, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: October 18, 2010
 
Title: Outline of a Digital Preservation System
 
I hate losing data. Dont you wish there was some way to store stuff so that it will be available forever, so that your websites could live on even after you die? But its a tricky problem. There are a number of things you have to worry about:
 
Hardware failure. The disk you had your data on died and you cant get data off it anymore. Or, even worse, your data has been silently corrupted.
 
Hardware skew. Your disks are still good, but theyre ancient and obscure and no one has drivers for them anymore. (I have some old IBM tapes that I cant read because the devices are so obscure.)
 
Filesystem skew. You can read the raw devices but the data was stored on it using a striping technology no modern operating systems implement, with a filesystem which stopped being supported after its lead developer was arrested for murder, and then encoded with a higher-level file distribution system that used erasure coding to spread data across multiple machines.
 
Format skew. Your documents may be stored in an obscure format that nobody has a reader for anymore.
 
Institutional failure. The people in charge of making sure all the other problems get addressed die or move on.
 
Theres a basic outline to the skew problems: use the simplest, most popular choice possible and then move to a replacement as it shows signs of going permanently extinct. It seems unlikely to me that ASCII text on a Unix file system in a JBOD configuration will ever completely die off, but if it does youll be safe for a long time before youll have to move things over.
 
Similarly, for the failure problems you want: a) to choose reliable material, b) to implement constant sanity checks, and c) have several layers of backups if the sanity checks dont get executed or fail.
 
OK, so lets get to a specific outline. You have a bunch of standard files (mostly ASCII derivatives, maybe PDFs) in a standard file system (UFS?) mounted read-only (with hardware-level write-prevention) from a bunch of standard SATA disks (no RAID or anything like that) on some machines running a modern Unix. You can serve these files up using bog-standard HTTP (or any other file transfer protocol that can be mapped to the model of a Unix file system). The file names (less a prefix for mounting the drive) are designed to be globally unique. The best way to do this is probably to combine a date and a DNS name (ala tag:). So you could imagine this file to be at:
 
Alongside the files, for each drive you have a manifest that lists the date the file was added to the preservation system followed by the globally-unique filename and two hashes: a fast hash (probably CRC32) and a standard secure hash (probably SHA1). As a background process, you (nightly? weekly?depends on how long it takes, I guess) go through each file and compare its fast hash against the one listed in the manifest. If the comparison fails, you go offline and sound the alarm.
 
Going offline isnt so bad, because you have at least two other replicas in different geographic locations under different political regimes. Any request traffic can go to them instead while you restore your system.
 
For safety, you should probably toss the whole drive and get it restored from one of the replica sites.
 
The manifest from each system at each site is replicated on a series of index servers (at least one at each site). The index servers run a simple HTTP redirector that maps from the secure hash or the globally unique filename to a box storing the file, using a table they generate from the manifests.
 
If bandwidth isnt an issue, the index server should proxy the data instead of redirecting you to preserve URLs. If it is an issue, you should probably try to reset the DNS name to any server which has failed to point to another redirector. So you can imagine the stable URL being:
 
and that redirecting to:
 
which serves the file. When 27 fails (i.e. is no longer serving all the data it was previously serving), its given a new number and the DNS A record for 27.web.resource.org is changed to point to the index servers. The index servers strip off any hdd prefix (such prefixes are prohibited at the root of the global namespace) and serve the request as they do a request for the stable URL.
 
The index servers also have a manifest of the manifests (with similar regular verification procedures). Each data server regularly publishes a file with the date and the secure hash of the manifest that its regular check was compared against. The index servers regularly request this file from each of the data servers and take offline any servers whose manifest hash doesnt match the one in their manifest of manifests.
 
Finally, a master manifest is generated by combining all of the manifests, sorting by date, and removing duplicates. (If in this process you find two different hashes for the same file, go   offline and sound the alarm.) At the end of every day during which files were added to the collection, the system verifies that the secure hash of all the files up through yesterday is the same as it was yesterday and then makes sure the index servers all agree on the new hash. If there is consensus, the hash of this new master manifest is calculated and very widely published (perhaps including a classified ad in the largest newspaper in each country). You should always be able to work backward from this widely-published hash to a correct state of the entire system. And since all of the manifests are public, anyone with a recent newspaper and some time on their hands should be able to verify the accuracy of their data.
 
Now this protects against accidental day-to-day hardware failure, but you also want to protect against long-tail catastrophic failures. You should use hetrogenous systems to avoid simultaneous hardware failure or software vulnerability, there should be no one with physical or electronic access to all the systems, as much as possible you should not be able to delete data without physical access, and the locations should be physically secure. Does it make sense to make an alternate copy (i.e. paper with bytes written in OCR-A or something?) in case of an EMP blast or something like that? Thinking about how to protect against these obscure failures seems like the trickiest part.
 
This system should be fairly simple to implement and operate (I cant imagine it being more than a couple pages of Python code) but even so you need someone to implement and operate it.
 
Recall that we have at least three sites in three political jurisdictions. Each site should be operated by an independent organization in that political jurisdiction. Each board should be governed by respected community members with an interest in preservation. Each board should have at least five seats and move quickly to fill any vacancies. An engineer would supervise the systems, an executive director would supervise the engineer, the board would supervise the executive director, and the public would supervise the board.
 
There are some basic fixed costs for operating such a system. One should calculate the high-end estimate for such costs along with high-end estimates of their growth rate and low-end estimates of the riskless interest rate and set up an endowment in that amount. The endowment would be distributed evenly to each board who would invest it in riskless securities (probably in banks whose deposits are ensured by their political systems).
 
Whenever someone wants to add something to the collection, you use the same procedure to figure out what to charge them, calculating the high-end cost of maintaining that much more data, and add that fee to the endowments (split evenly as before).
 
What would the rough cost of such a system be? Perhaps the board and other basic administrative functions would cost $100,000 a year, and the same for an executive director and an engineer. That would be $300,000 a year. Assuming a riskless real interest rate of 1%, a perpetuity for that amount would cost $30 million. Thus the cost for three such institutions would be around $100 million. Expensive, but not unmanageable. (For comparison, the Internet Archive has an annual budget of $10-15M, so this whole project could be funded until the end of time for about what 6-10 years of the Archive costs.)
 
Storage costs are trickier because the cost of storage and so on falls so rapidly, but a very conservative estimate would be around $2000 a gigabyte. Again, expensive but not unmanageable. For the price of a laptop, you could have a gigabyte of data preserved for  perpetuity.
 
These are both very high-end estimates. I imagine that were someone to try operating such a system it would quickly become apparent that it could be done for much less. Indeed, I suspect a Mad Archivist could set up such a system using only hobbyist levels of money. You can recruit board members in your free time, setting up the paperwork would be a little annoying but not too expensive, and to get started youd just need three servers. (Ill volunteer to write the Python code.) You could then build up the endowment through the interest money left over after your lower-than-expected annual costs. (If annual interest payments ever got truly excessive, the money could go to reducing the accession costs for new material.)
 
Any Mad Archivists around?
 
[Thanks to Brewster Kahle and the Internet Archive for inspiring many of the technical details of this scheme.]
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 18, 2010
 
HathiTrust just published more on their cost model: 
http://www.hathitrust.org/cost
 
posted by Ryan Wick
 on October 19, 2010 #
 
Interesting. Their figures would suggest a cost around $375 per gigabyte using my numbers, which seems much more affordable.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 19, 2010 #
 
Tricky thinking out all the possible goals and permutations here.  Thought fragments:
 
For now, you can host stuff with Amazon (S3), Rackspace (Cloud Files), and Google (App Engine) for 15/GB/mo per provider plus bandwidth.
 
You could store copies at all those places, keep a local copy along the lines of what you talk about here, and do some of your own verification on top of what the providers do.  For an endowment, someone could do that, promise to find alternate hosting arrangements if the service they use disappears, and promise to pass on the job and money to someone else when they quit.  Or, better yet, you have different folks dealing with each service, so the person paying the bills and ensuring succession isnt a single point of failure.
 
If legal takedowns are an issue, maybe some folks just have the job of keeping cold copies, or even unidentifiable encrypted cold copies, offline, and someone trusted gets the data from them and puts it back up when/where they can.
 
And since storing or sending lots of text or HTML is so dirt cheap, volunteer archivists could totally be a force here.
 
posted by RF
 on October 20, 2010 #
 
You might want to take a look at a funding model we have put together for indefinite storage of data based on one-time payments:
 
http://arks.princeton.edu/ark:/88435/dsp01w6634361k
 
posted by Serge Goldstein
 on October 21, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: October 18, 2010
 
Title: When Brute Force Fails
 
Liberals dont like talking about crime. The classic answerfixing the root causes of crimenow seems hopelessly ambitious. And our natural sympathy for the millions ground down by an out-of-control prison system and a pointless war on drugs doesnt play well with voters, especially when most criminals cant vote. The general belief seems to be that the problem of crime has been solvedafter all, crime levels have dropped dramatically since the law-and-order 80sand that the real problem now is not too much crime, but too much punishment. If voters dont agree, its because TV news continues to obsess over violent crime even as actual occurrences of it have cratered, leaving behind a population who wants to do even more to crack down on an army of bad guys who dont really exist. The smartest liberal position on crime seems to be changing the subject and talking about white-collar crime instead (which, as recent economic news has made clear, is a real epidemic).
 
Mark Kleiman, in his brilliant new book, When Brute Force Fails, takes a different view. Crime, aside from drug crimes (where his work persuasively argues that the abuse of illicit drugs is a human tragedy but not a major threat to the social order), is serious. (Presumably this only applies to classic violent crimes; its obvious this logic doesnt work for violations of copyright law and civil disobedience.) Even where theres a small amount of actual crime, its possible thats just because people are wasting so much time preventing it. Theres a serious social cost to having to remember to lock our doors and carry our keys around all the time, let alone the money we waste on burglar alarms and car-tracking services and all the rest.
 
While I find the methodology he uses to show it wildly problematic1, I agree with his point that crime really sucks. Even if a burglar only causes $400 worth of damage, Id pay far more than $400 to prevent a burglary  the loss of privacy, the sense of violation, the disruption of my normal order, the distraction of having to deal with police and repairmen and insurance agents, etc. all add up to make burglary a nightmare well above the direct economic damage it causes.
 
Such things are a frustration for white suburbanites, but for poor people stuck in the ghetto, theyre a nightmare. Crime is yet another disadvantage and a particularly noxious one at that. Even aside from all the other indignities suffered by the poor, just imagining life in a crime-ridden neighborhood is enough to make your skin crawl.
 
But, Kleiman insists, we also have to count the harm to the criminals! Going through lengthy court proceedings, spending years in abusive prisons, having to deal with officious parole officers and the loss of liberty they cause are all serious costs and we cant wave them away just because they happen to the bad guys. Law enforcement isnt a zero-sum game: both criminals and victims can benefit from less punishment.2
 
So theres the question: How can we have less crime with less punishment? The first thing to notice is that low-crime is an equilibrium state: if nobody is committing any crimes, all anti-crime resources can be focused on anyone who decides to break the law, making it irrational for them to even try. But high-crime is also an equilibrium (assuming reasonable levels of punishment): if everyone is breaking the law, the police cant possibly stop all of them, so its not so risky to keep on breaking the law.
 
To reduce both crime and punishment, you just need to tip the society from one equilibrium to the other. And, Kleiman argues, we can do that with a technique he calls dynamic concentration. Imagine there are three robbers (Alice, Bob, and Carol) and one policeman (Eve). Eve can only stop one robber at a crime, so if more than one person is committing a burglary at the same time, she decides to be fair and switch around who she arrests  sometimes she nabs Alice, sometimes Bob, sometimes Carol.
 
The problem is that the robbers know this and they know it means they only have a 1/3 chance of getting caught. A guaranteed arrest is bad news, but a 1/3 chance of getting arrested isnt worth quitting over. So the robbers keep on robbing and the cop keeps failing to keep up with them.
 
But now imagine Eve adopts a new policy: dynamic concentration. Instead of randomly deciding who to go after, she goes after people in alphabetical order. So if Alice is committing a crime, Eve always goes after her first if shes committing a crime  otherwise Bob, and then Carol. Now Alice knows that if she robs someone, shes guaranteed to get caught (instead of just having a one-third chance), so she decides to sit this one out. You might think this would just lead Bob to step into the breach, but now that Alice is out, Eve can turn her focus to Bob instead. So Bob also decides to call it quits. That just leaves Carol, who Eve now gets to watch like a hawk, and so Carol also gives up the game. And there you have it: dynamic concentration stops all the crime without adding any more police.
 
Obviously things arent so clean in the real world, but I think this is the first game-theoretic argument Ive read that seems to have some real force. Kleiman backs it up with some messier simulations and some real-life examples. Unfortunately, most are stories about cracking down on drugs or other unserious crimes like squeegee men, but the general point seems to work.
 
For twenty years, High Point, North Carolina had tried to fight the crack dealing in the citys African-American West End neighborhood. Any viewer of The Wire can guess the results: as soon as they made a case against one drug dealer, another would jump in to take his place. So with the help of crime scholar David Kennedy, they tried a new approach. First, they spent months building trust between the police and the community to build consensus that the drug trade was something worth stopping. Then they pushed extra resources into the neighborhood and started putting together cases against the dealers  but didnt make any arrests. Only when they had a case against every known dealer did they act.
 
Even then they didnt make arrests. They visited the dealers homes with a neighborhood leader, who told them that the neighborhood had decided they had to go straight. Meanwhile a cop presented them with the legal case against them. The pair asked the dealer to quit and offered whatever servicestattoo removal, job trainingwould help them do that. Ten of the thirteen dealers took them up on the offer, leaving plenty of room for the justice system to lock up the remaining three, plus the one new dealer who tried to take over their old business. Five years later, the market is still closed, and the police have been able to direct their resources to pull the same trick on the other drug markets. Crime is down, and arrests are down too. Dynamic concentration works, with the citys different drug markets standing in for Alice, Carol, and Bob. (The other examplesespecially Hawaiis HOPE programare even more interesting, but take longer to tell.)
 
Dynamic concentration isnt a panacea. Obviously it only works where the costs of monitoring are much less than the costs of enforcement. But this still leaves lots of opportunities and clever selection of the population to concentrate on can significantly decrease the cost of monitoring.
 
While the big idea of dynamic concentration is at the center of the book, its not one of those one-trick monographs where the author lays out one good idea and then spends the rest of the book repeating it. Instead, the book ranges over the whole theory and practice crime control in America and nearly every page is filled with interesting facts and a new perspective.
 
And in a brilliant final chapter, he turns his lens on himself and asks what could go wrong with his proposals. For an intellectual, the level of humility and self-criticism involved is truly impressive. (He confesses to probably all of the complaints that youre thinking about raising right now.)
 
For anyone interested in policy analysis, this book should be a classic. It shows how simple tools (calculating the scale of the problem, modeling it with game theory, and calculating the costs of a solution) can have radical implications.
 
Kleiman uses surveys asking people how much they would pay to achieve a ten percent reduction in a crime. Aside from all the usual problems with such willingness-to-pay metrics, this seems like a particularly meaningless question. I dont have a good sense of what the crime rate is, let alone what a 10% decrease in it would look like. I cant possibly assign a sensible monetary value to something so abstract. Itd be better to ask people what theyd pay to prevent one crime, assuming the crime rate is low enough that Karelis-type effects dont come into play.
 
Since a rational criminal would by definition be better off committing the crime, this mainly comes up in cases of information asymmetry. Unlike in playground games of Cops and Robbers, real police are better off warning the criminals away from doing crime than tricking them into doing it and then sneaking up and catching them.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 18, 2010
 
Since a rational criminal would by definition be better off committing the crime, this mainly comes up in cases of information asymmetry.
 
 
posted by scs
 on October 19, 2010 #
 
And there you have it: dynamic concentration stops all the crime without adding any more police.
 
Sigh. Why do people take this old mathematical-induction joke seriously? Its worse than the Laffer curve (which was at least arguable  at an upper limit). A while back,  elsewhere, it was seriously being posted about file-sharing, to much shredding in comments.
 
The pair asked the dealer to quit and offered whatever servicestattoo removal, job trainingwould help them do that
 
I think the key phrase there is offered whatever services.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on October 19, 2010 #
 
Kleiman backs it up with some messier simulations and some real-life examples.
 
Is this his only evidence for a multiple-equilibrium model with sharp discontinuities or shifts, as opposed to some sort of linear or quasi-linear model?
 
(There seem to be plenty of places where crime rates vary considerably without sudden enormous shifts like multiple equilibria suggest. Japan, America, or Englands crime rates over the 20th century seem like possible examples.)
 
posted by gwern
 on October 19, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: October  8, 2010
 
Title: The Real Problem with Waiting for Superman
 
[crossposted at HuffPo]
 
Waiting for Superman, in case you havent heard, is the hot new film from Inconvenient Truth director Davis Guggenheim. While his last film capitalized on liberal guilt over destroying our planet (and maybe voting for Ralph Nader?), Superman (yes, the film is weirdly insistent on those unnecessary quotation marks) is for people who feel bad about sending their kids to private school while poor kids wallow in the slums.
 
Teaching should be easy, Guggenheim declares as we watch a cartoon teacher rip open his students skulls and pour what looks like blue Spaghetti-Os inside. (When he closes the skulls the kids sprout wings and fly out the open classroom window.) This is about as close as the film gets to depicting actual teaching. (I checked with the friend who paid for my ticket and he confirmed this scene was meant seriously, though thankfully not literally.)
 
Despite repeatedly insisting poor kids just need better teachers, the film never says what it is that better teachers actually do. Instead it highlights the voices of American Express pitchman Geoffrey Canada and Bill Gates, whose obsessions with higher standardized test scores have led their schools to cancel recess and art in favor of more hours of scripted memorization. Why bother with art if teaching is just about filling kids heads with pre-determined facts?
 
The real crisis in American education isnt teachers unions preventing incompetent teachers from getting fired (as awful as that may be), its the single-minded focus on standardized test scores that underlies everything from Bushs No Child Left Behind to Obamas Race to the Top to the charter schools lionized in the film. Real education is about genuine understanding and the ability to figure things out on your own; not about making sure every 7th grader has memorized all the facts some bureaucrats have put in the 7th grade curriculum.
 
This would be obvious if the film dared to show real teaching in the schools it lauds. Instead of the rich engagement you imagine from progressive private schools, you find teachers who read from assigned scripts while enforcing a regime of zero-tolerance discipline. Theyre nightmarish gulags where childrens innate creativity is beaten out of them and replaced with martial order. Because standardized behavior is what makes you do well on standardized tests.
 
Film is the perfect medium for showing what this life is like. Seeing terrified kids up on the big screen, you cant help but empathize with them. So we never see it. Instead, the film hides behind charts and graphs and interviews. When you see a great teacher, you are seeing a work of art, Geoffrey Canada tells us, but this is something Guggenheim would rather tell than show.
 
The film has other flaws. It insists all of Americas problems would be solved if only poor kids would memorize more: Pittsburgh is falling apart not because of deindustrialization, but because its schools are filled with bad teachers. American inequality isnt caused by decades of Reaganite tax cuts and deregulation, but because of too many failing schools. Our trade deficit isnt a result of structural economic factors but simply because Chinese kids get a better education. Make no mistake, I desperately want every kid to go to a school they love, but it seems far-fetched to claim this would solve all our countrys other problems. At the end of the day, we have an economy that works for the rich by cheating the poor and unequal schools are the result of that, not the cause.
 
Im glad a talented filmmaker has decided to draw attention to the horrible inequities in our nations schools. But Im terrified that the solutions put forth by its proponents will only make things worse. We know what happens when we fire teachers who dont do enough to raise their students test scores, or when we adopt more stringent requirements for classroom curriculum: we squeeze out what little genuine education these schools have left. And thats something we should really feel guilty about.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October  8, 2010
 
Aaron, this is a serious topic that your essay fails to address seriously, as demonstrated by its straw-man dismissal of assessment as based on simply memorizing facts. We need some metric to verify that children can read and calculate, because if they cant, then they are doomed. If standardized tests fail to diagnose this, then please specify a superior alternative, with evidence. The stakes are high. I went to public schools in Los Angeles. Some of my teachers were shockingly incompetent, like my 5th grade teacher who was unable to spell simple words. Not everyone should be a teacher.
 
posted by John F.
 on October  8, 2010 #
 
The problem with highlighting charter schools, is that they arent a scalable model by definition.  Ask the public school teachers in LAUSD how many of their kids are KIPP rejects.  Charters work, b/c they can kick out kids that dont do what they have to do (that includes if the parents wont take the necessary steps to help the childs education).
 
At the end of the day, charter schools are supposed to be test beds for the districts that fund them.  In reality, they sift through to find the best students with parental support, among all students, in mostly under-served areas, and educate them.  Its hardly a scalable solution.
 
Charter schools in urban areas have the ability to kick kids out.  Give the same ability to public schools and youll have the same results.  The lack of honesty in the documentary leads people to herald a system that gets results, but isnt a model for public education in the US.
 
posted by Matt H
 on October  9, 2010 #
 
A teacher from a wealthy high school district told me that at the end of 9th grade, they give the kids the 12th grade exit exam. 70% pass, but still have to spend 3 more years in high school.
 
So we have tests that we trust (for better or worse), but we consistently do the wrong thing with the results.
 
The problem seems to come from teaching kids based on their age instead of by their ability to build on what they know.
 
posted by Kurt
 on October  9, 2010 #
 
Aaron,
 
I read your blog because you often have insightful things to say about things I care about (software, community organizing & life). I really strongly agree with your perspective on this issue, but I guess that is okay  and in fact is why it is interesting to read your thoughts.
 
Schools in America today are failing our children and the reformers profiled in Superman are making valiant efforts to change that reality. What is most interesting about the reform movement to me is that it provides an opportunity to try new approaches  there are some charter schools that are taking a rigorous core academics based approach, while others (like the small but wonderful Ark Charter School in Troy, NY where I have spent some time as a volunteer) make the arts a focus and core part of the school day.  Reasonable assessments on the students performance allows us as a society to decide which of these approaches works best - so more children can benefit from the education ideas that have the biggest impact.
 
PCCC wouldnt send out an email to your list without testing subject lines to see what works; why would you encourage people to give up on constant improvement and a facts based approach to teaching methodologies?
 
Geoffery Canada is a much more thoughtful and interesting character than the AmEx pitch man you dismiss him as.  You should really read Paul Toughs profile of him or visit the HCZ if you ever have the opportunity.
 
The goal should not be for every kid to be going to a school they love as you put it, but a school that helps them learn what they need to be successful in an ever more complex world. That is not incompatible with joy or creativity but the failing schools and unions you are defending are less likely to offer either of those.
 
posted by Nathan W.
 on October  9, 2010 #
 
I saw WFS today, and it broke my heart.  I thought it was well made, and the 5 kids they followed really wanted to learn.  What I really wish is that they showed the other side of the story 5 kids with parents who dont give a sh*t about what their kids are doing in school. I think this is the bigger problem.  Not the kids with parents who care the problem in the lower income schools is often parents who dont care.  My sister sits in back to school night or parent/teacher conference day & maybe sees two parents if shes lucky.  Many of the teachers who arent jaded yet really care about the students. Its the parents who need to start caring more in many instances.
 
posted by Darlene
 on October  9, 2010 #
 
I disagree.  Creativity still has to have some foundation in basic knowledge.  Bad teachers fail at giving kids this foundation.  Tenure for unmerited teachers is a horrible idea.  Ive had friends in LA tell me that they never learned in class and just played poker all day long.
 
posted by Catherine
 on October  9, 2010 #
 
The best part about Waiting for Superman is that its making everyone who was already pro-education reform think again about the stance they took, myself included.
 
I think many of them will agree with much of your position, especially about the weakness of testing and the danger in demonizing teachers.  See Finland for a great example of the right approach - we face a slightly different challenge but the lessons learned there arent being brought here.
 
What concerns me most is the number of people having the conversation without getting involved.  At least global warming is something we can all do our small part to fix - education seems to be something that everyone loves to talk about but few are willing to do anything about.
 
posted by Nihal
 on October  9, 2010 #
 
I havent seen the film and I guess its nice that some of the kids really want to learn but, more widely, the problem is that blacks and hispanics are dumber than Asians and whites. Cest tout. Itll be indisputable in a few years if our genetic understanding keeps increasing.
 
posted by Bad Man
 on October  9, 2010 #
 
I would suggest you to read Weapons of Mass Instruction by John Taylor Gatto. He argues that teacher hands are tied and they cant change anything. Its a very interesting read if youre into this topic. It also provides very interesting perspective on schooling history and reasons why its the way it is now.
 
Imagine if you were a teacher and you wanted to fix the obvious problems, teach more and better, but you couldnt because of how schooling system is made. Wouldnt that crush you as a person and make you feel hopeless?
 
We need a global schooling revolution, not reforms. You cant fix what was broken from the start.
 
The way were advancing as civilization, we will require a lot of smart people and a lot less of average and below. Every one has their own unique path, but most us fail to find it. Schools at the moment just mislead us from this path with their fits all approach and crush those with unique perspectives.
 
Well, just my view on this matter.
 
posted by MM
 on October  9, 2010 #
 
This is an interesting article, but I believe there are multiple reasons that the education system lets so many kids fall through the cracks.
 
Its not that standardized tests as a whole are bad, but that the tests dont test the critical thinking and problem solving processes that we want.  We need better, shorter, and more frequent (1 at the end of every year) standardized test that properly assesses their progress.
 
Teachers need to get raises based on improvements in the childrens grades.  Currently teachers arent paid based on performance, which is how most thriving industries make sure the best are compensated properly for their efforts.
 
School needs to have more days with more frequent and shorter breaks (more 3 day weekends, less 3 week breaks).  The first month of the school year is usually spent re-hashing the last few months of the last school year because you lose a lot over the summer break.
 
Option for a technical school instead of high school.  A lot of kids are going to be electricians or another technical job that doesnt require a high school education to be good at and this option will get them the education theyll use at an earlier stage (I have a cousin who would have made great use of this if it was available).
 
Nationalized and centralized funding for school resources.  The current systems allow for schools in wealthy areas to get plenty of funding and schools in poor areas to get little funding because theyre paid directly by the surrounding district.  Schools in poorer areas will never be at the same level unless people in the rich areas are helping to pay for them too.
 
I apologize for the long rant, but Ive had a long time to put together my thoughts on this.
 
posted by Jeff Edwards
 on October  9, 2010 #
 
Nathan:
 
You get what you measure. There are some subject lines that lead to
high open rates but low click-thru rates. Some that do the reverse.
Others cause people to click but not to take action. Just saying we
should measure things isnt enough.
 
Thats why its so crucial to talk about our real goals and establish
decent ways to measure them. And my critique of the film was that this
was a subject it studiously avoided. Presenting schools as a black box
whose purpose is just to churn out higher test scores is exactly the
wrong approach. The only way we can stop things like teaching to the
test and the other horrors the obsession with accountability have
caused is by looking more closely.
 
My review of Toughs book is here: http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whateverittakes
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 10, 2010 #
 
I dont know any of you. I am just a rural Mississippi  teacher. I started the year with 30 first graders, no assistant, and no 6breaks at all. Finally they gave us a 50 minute planning time. I work hard. But the district would not buy our Math books, so we decided to copy black masters. Then we had no ink or master rolls to copy. When we finally got the materials in the risograph went out. When I had my first practice spelling test of the year, one of my students broke down and sobbed because he could not do it. I knew I had failed him and I cried all day. The fourth grade teachers deal with 3 fights in the classroom daily. Do you really want to know whats wrong with education? Come walk, sleep, and eat in my shoes!
 
posted by Sa
 on October 10, 2010 #
 
Im waiting for the DVD myself, but out of an interest in what competition is trotted out as and for, I will be looking into ways big business or everything that isnt considered a special interest shapes education in the U.S.
 
What advantages could a totalitarian (China) state run system of meritocracy have over a pseudo democratic (the U.S.) system of meritocracy?  Chinas or any other totalitarian states ironic propensity to apply egalitarian principles in order to take advantage of a broader portion of the population, leaves as an only the hope for competing systems (non-totalitarian) being for the scholastically erudite, who have the opportunity, to apply themselves to the necessary disciplines.
 
I would point to the unburdening of the business class (Reaganism) and the general lack of any sense of systemic responsibility on the part of business to anything other than making money as a pivot point to turn around (the U.S.) on.  Rather than requiring those institutions and persons that have taken every advantage of the education system of the U.S. be moderated in wealth according to the benefit received from the education system, much the opposite is true.  The list of how corporations have left their footprints on the education system is long, most apparent and repugnant to me personally, would be Microsofts monopoly.
 
The formation of curriculum around available opportunities is already inherent in the choices of students and is likely to reinforce the status quo all on its own.  Aside from undermining the credibility of the wisdom of the masses, such a paradigm is likely to undermine the attraction to the more esoteric pursuits of the particular interests of individual students which leads to the much vaunted innovation.
 
posted by James
 on October 11, 2010 #
 
Aaron -
 
Have you seen the trailer for Race to Nowhere? Looks like they are going to tackle the issue with the current education system focusing solely on increasing standardized scores.
 
http://smartpei.typepad.com/robert_patersons_weblog/2010/10/race-to-nowhere-our-education-system.html
 
posted by Tim Kadlec
 on October 11, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: October  7, 2010
 
Title: Rethinking Hyperbolic Discounting (or, The Percentage Fallacy, Continued)
 
In a famous experiment, some people are asked to choose between $100 today or $120 tomorrow. Many choose the first. Meanwhile, some people are asked to choose between $100 sixty days from now or $120 sixty-one days from now. Almost everyone choose the laster. The puzzle is this: why are people willing to sacrifice $20 to avoid waiting a day right now but not in the future?
 
The standard explanation is hyperbolic discounting: humans tend to weigh immediate effects much more strongly than distant ones. But I think the actual psychological effect at work here is just the percentage fallacy. If I ask for the money now, I may have to wait 60 seconds. But if I get it tomorrow I have to wait 143900%more. By contrast, waiting 61 days is only 1.6% worse than waiting 6 days. Why not wait an extra 2% when you get 16% more money for it?
 
Has anyone done a test confirming the percentage fallacy? A good test would be to show people treat the $100 vs. $120 tradeoff as equivalent to the $1000 to $1200 tradeoff.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October  7, 2010
 
Doesnt either explanation lead to the same empirical predictions in all cases? I cant think of any experiment that would separate the two ideas. If so, theyre really equivalent.
 
posted by Evan Harper
 on October  7, 2010 #
 
This type of research is often used to try to infer a natural discount rate for net present value calculations, but I think it misses an element of human nature that sort of mimics the probability of default. For example, if the choice is $100 right now or $120 tomorrow, I have to consider that you may not show up tomorrow or you might say you were only kidding about offering me money. If I elect to take the $100 right now, I will know immediately if the offer is serious.
 
With sixty and sixty-one days in the future, the probability of default is effectively the same (both give you plenty of time to leave town and not pay up). And, as you say, once the recipient has accepted the concept of deferred gratification, there is little reason not to wait an extra day for 20% more.
 
posted by Ian
 on October  7, 2010 #
 
This is the Time Value of Money - an important reason why interest rates exist. 100 today is 105 a year from now, when dealing in macro. Of course to just you and I 100 today is 120 tomorrow. Same with a car or home loan, paying a discounted chunk right now that adds up to a big interest markup is more valuable than shelling out the discounted full value now, with no interest rate markup.
 
Experiments are happening all around us, right now.
 
posted by Daniel
 on October  7, 2010 #
 
My initial reaction (not having ever read the actual papers, and so knowing nothing about the experimental setup) was the same as Ians.  This seems more about the risk of default if deferring the payoff, and/or the hassle value of having to show up again/stay in contact/etc..
 
How about this setup: I will give you either a check dated today for $100, or one dated today + deltaT for $100 + $X; which would you prefer?
 
This seems to make the two cases more equal on all dimensions except the amount of money.
 
posted by Emile
 on October  7, 2010 #
 
Percentage fallacy seems like a distinct and interesting thing.  Intuitively Im not convinced its all of whats going on here.  Itd be interesting to see data for many combinations of delay and reward choices.  But sort of like Evan says, it wouldnt be obvious how to nail down which bias (or blend of biases) is behind the pattern; it probably wouldnt exactly match any theory.  I think there must be entirely other experiments that need to be done here, but I dont know where to start designing them.
 
Im sympathetic with Ians guess that hyperbolic discounting might have to do with uncertainty, but I wonder if the relationships a little different.  Its not necessarily that were rationally modeling the risk of default in particular; rather, maybe the reason were wired not to worry much about the future is that our world used to be so volatile that for planning two months ahead was mostly a waste of time  the food you stored would rot or get stolen, etc.  So that uncertainty is more or less hardwired in as disregard for the distant future.
 
You can also make that kind of second-best argument about overoptimism  second-best here meaning its not rational, but it produced about the right behaviors back when our brains were evolving.  Overoptimism might give us an incorrect picture of the facts, but lead us to make good investments we wouldnt otherwise make because wed undervalue the returns.
 
There are other explanations for discounting, too  e.g., we dont have the capacity to taste far-off rewards the way we do close ones because we cant viscerally tie the reward to what we did to get it in the same way.  It might be that long-range vision is a trait we could have evolved but didnt since it wasnt much use long ago, or that difficulty deferring gratification is just a fundamental problem with how anything like the human brain learns.
 
I think all I really know is that were far from done empirically describing peoples problems making decisions, and further from understanding their sources and implications.  Some fixes might have bad side effects.  Its like trying to debug our crusty, buggy, but basically working firmware  hard and full of surprises.
 
Anyone recommend particular books, etc. on this stuff?  Liked Dan Arielys books, liked the research in Nudge but hated the writing, and liked Robert Cialdinis Influence even though a lot of its written like a marketing primer.
 
posted by Randall
 on October  7, 2010 #
 
It seems like a straightforward trust issue, rather than either of those things. I guess Im agreeing with Ian: the difference between option one, where you can stand between the dude and the door until he gives you money and the other three options is that you have to go on trust for the other three.
 
If peoples mothers made the offer, I imagine theres a good chance youd see a different result.
 
Well, depending on the mother.
 
posted by quinn
 on October  7, 2010 #
 
Assuming the following: implicit trust of the person being questioned in the interviewer and the interviewers associated institution, that collecting tomorrow would mean any time after today, no inconvenience in collecting the money later and that many would mean a substantially large portion across a varied size range of samplings, it would seem that peoples tendency to anthropomorphize (give human characteristics to) everything would be at play.  Trust issues and peoples experience with their own and others fits of generosity would be factors that would form in the subconscious and manifest as decisions in spite of every bit of trust a person would purport have.
 
What lies behind the loci of focus in recognizing our own species is as primitive as it ever was.
 
posted by James
 on October  7, 2010 #
 
A bird in the hand is worth >1.2 in the bush.
 
posted by Will
 on October 10, 2010 #
 
I linked to this and your previous post on the percentage fallacy in a thread on Less Wrong, and there were some useful responses. Worth reading the thread, I think.
 
In particular, it turned out that something similar or identical had been discussed there before, and it cited an experiment demonstrating this effect by Tversky and Kahneman themselves. (Heres the original paper. See page 457.) However, they didnt describe it as a distinct fallacy as you did, but rather, explained it in terms of something they called psychological accounts (page 456). Theres probably some follow-up research on that.
 
(As for hyperbolic discounting, though, I think its been confirmed pretty strongly, in that its been shown not just that humans tend to weigh immediate effects much more strongly than distant ones but that this actually tends to follow a hyperbolic function. If you want to hypothesize that this effect is caused by the percentage fallacy, then youd have to show that it predicts this particular pattern.)
 
posted by Adam
 on October 24, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August  4, 2010
 
Title: Campaigners, Please!
 
So Im looking to hire a campaigner for my online progressive group. What does a campaigner do? Well, the basic process looks like this:
 
Read the news and look for a political fight that might interest people.
 
Think of a way that ordinary people can get involved.
 
Write an email briefly explaining the issue and persuading people to take action on it.
 
Channel those actions into a wider impact, e.g. by informing the press, delivering petitions, running ads, etc.
 
People who might be a good fit for this include political bloggers, who have a lot of experience with 1 and 3, and people who have run campaigns on local issues, giving them experience with 2 and 4. Its also helpful if you have experience with web design and HTML.
 
But the most important thing is just being creative and persuasive and passionate about the issues. Every campaign is different and each one has to be run differently to seize peoples attention. Someone who can think outside the box and try something new each time is going to be more successful than someone whos an expert at the standard way of doing things.
 
Having done it myself, nothing competes with the thrill of running a campaign. Instead of just getting upset about the news, you get to do something about it. You get to rally people to action, explain the story to the media, and really get into a fight with the bad guys. And every once in a while you actually win a victory that improves the lives of millions of people. Its ridiculously exciting, fun, and rewarding.
 
If youre interested, send a resume and a short note persuading me to take some action to me@aaronsw.com with campaigner in the subject.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August  4, 2010
 
Tip - it might help this ad to be more effective if, within it, you identified the online progressive group.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on August  5, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 27, 2010
 
Title: You Dont Know John (Maynard Keynes)
 
From the right, Gary Becker writes:
 
Keynes and many earlier economists emphasized that unemployment rises
  during recessions because nominal wage rates tend to be inflexible in
  the downward direction.
 
From the left, Matt Yglesias writes:
 
the Keynesian prescription is not only for the government to run deficits in response to recessions, but to run surpluses in expansions. Thus, the Clinton administrations fiscal policies were arguably Keynesian but the Reagan and (especially) George W Bush administrations were implementing an agenda that flew in the face of Keynes ideas much more clearly than anything Angela Merkels ever done.
 
Neither of these are true at all. Pretty much the very first thing Keynes says in the general theory is that downwardly-inflexible nominal wage rates (sticky wages) are a good thing. And he spends a large part of chapter 8 denouncing the practice of saving surpluses (sinking funds).
 
So where do they get this stuff? While these arent the views of Keynes, both these views are held by the so-called New Keynesians  people like Paul Krugman and Greg Mankiw, who have tried to shoehorn a moderate version of Keynes into classical economics. These proponents are rather more prominent than more traditional Keynesians like Jamie Galbraith, so political commentators hear their view and assume its a faithful representation of Keynes own.
 
Perhaps Keynes was wrong  after all, we shouldnt slavishly follow the scribblings of some defunct economist. But if so, we should tell the truth and admit were disagreeing with Keynes, not expounding his ideas. (Both Yglesias and Becker have not run a correction, despite my emails.) Furthermore, we should actually engage with Keynes argument.
 
On sticky wages, Keynes says that if nominal wages could fall, then nominal costs would fall, which would mean that nominal prices would fall, which means that real wages would end up staying the same.1 But, even worse, if there was no stickiness at all, nothing would stop nominal wages from falling further and further until eventually everyone was paid zero.2 I have never heard the New Keynesians respond to this argument.
 
On the question of surpluses, Keynes criticizes them as a pointless reduction of aggregate demand. They create unemployment because they take money out of circulation for no real purpose. Its just supposed to sit around until a rainy day when the economy isnt doing so well. But when that rainy day comes, the reason the economy isnt doing well is because people are out of work. If thats true, you can simply print more money to get them back to work without any ill effects. (Printing money only causes inflation at full employment.) You dont get any benefit from having taken the money out of circulation earlier.3
 
Both these seem like strong arguments to me. Perhaps thats why its easier to pretend they dont exist.
 
Chapter 2:
 
if money-wages change, one would have expected the classical school to argue that prices would change in almost the same proportion, leaving the real wage and the level of unemployment practically the same as before, any small gain or loss to labour being at the expense or profit of other elements of marginal cost which have been left unaltered.
 

 
Chapter 21:
 
If, on the contrary, money-wages were to fall without limit whenever there was a tendency for less than full employment, the asymmetry would, indeed, disappear. But in that case there would be no resting-place below full employment until either the rate of interest was incapable of falling further or wages were zero. In fact we must have some factor, the value of which in terms of money is, if not fixed, at least sticky, to give us any stability of values in a monetary system.
 

 
Chapter 8:
 
We must also take account of the effect on the aggregate propensity to consume of Government sinking funds for the discharge of debt paid for out of ordinary taxation. For these represent a species of corporate saving, so that a policy of substantial sinking funds must be regarded in given circumstances as reducing the propensity to consume. It is for this reason that a change-over from a policy of Government borrowing to the opposite policy of providing sinking funds (or vice versa) is capable of causing a severe contraction (or marked expansion) of effective demand.
 
[]
 
Or again, in Great Britain at the present time (1935) [thanks to] the principles of sound finance [sinking funds are so large] that even if private individuals were ready to spend the whole of their net incomes it would be a severe task to restore full employmentThe sinking funds of local authorities now stand  at an annual figure of more than half the amount which these authorities are spending on the whole of their new developments. [footnote giving the amounts] Yet it is not certain that the Ministry of Health are aware, when they insist on stiff sinking funds by local authorities, how much they may be aggravating the problem of unemployment.
 

 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 27, 2010
 
On point number two, I think you are missing the role government surpluses would play in moderating inflation during periods of rapid growth, while repaying the debt incurred by deficit spending our way out of a previous recession, all the while getting us ready for the next cycle. Neo-Keynesians are about doing the right thing at the right time. Neither Keynes nor we ourselves have seen much of that, but we can hope.
 
posted by Warren Yoder
 on July 27, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July  1, 2010
 
Title: The Perils of Parfit 1: Credible Commitments
 
On the advice of several people, I started reading Derek Parfits Reasons and Persons. I havent gotten very far, but it seems to me to be a horribly muddled book, wrong on just about every point. So perhaps this will be an ongoing series where I debunk the book in sequence. I apologize to my readers if these posts seem obvious and not very interesting. Thats because I think the situations Parfit discusses are actually quite simple and its only his muddled terminology that makes them seem tricky.
 
Lets clarify Parfits discussion of self-defeating theories, which really comes down to a discussion about credible commitments. For simplicity, imagine there is no interest or inflation and your only goal in life is to maximize how much money you have. Thus an act is rational iff it contributes to that goal.
 
Case 1: There are two buttons. SUBTRACT removes $1000 from your bank account, ADD adds $5000 to your bank account. Obviously it is rational to press ADD and irrational to press SUBTRACT.
 
Case 2: There is one button, BOTH, which does both at the same time. Obviously it is rational to press BOTH, since it results in a net gain of $4000.
 
Case 3: There is a different button, DELAY, which adds $5000 to your bank account today and then removes $1000 in exactly one week. (DELAY is a weird button  to prevent you from using it twice at the same time, it stays down for the whole week and only pops back up once the $1000 is removed.) Obviously it is rational to press DELAY since it too results in a net gain of $4000.
 
Case 4: There are two buttons: DELAY, which is the same as before, and EVADE, which changes your bank account number so that none of the other buttons work. You can only press each button once and they have no other consequences. It is rational to press DELAY and then EVADE, for a net gain of $5000.
 
When is it rational to press EVADE? Only when you dont expect to be able to press DELAY ever again. (EVADE gains you at most $1000, while DELAY gains you at least $4000.) If you could press DELAY twice, would it be rational to hit EVADE after the first press? Of course not, itd cost you at least $4000. But Parfit seems to suggest one is acting rationally irrationally by not pressing it. The notion seems nonsensical.
 
Case 5: Same two buttons, except after you press the DELAY button it engages a little impenetrable metal cover that physically prevents you from pressing EVADE. Its rational to press DELAY. Then its rational to press EVADE, but thats kind of irrelevant, because its also impossible.
 
Case 6: Same as 5, except it injects you with a serum that prevents you from pressing EVADE. Again, its rational to press DELAY and then rational but impossible to press EVADE.
 
I dont see a big difference between these two cases, but Parfit seems to think the difference is vital.
 
Perhaps its the fact that another person is involved that leads to the complications?
 
Case 7: Same as 4, except the $1000 goes into Bobs account and only Bob can press DELAY. Bob has the same notion of rationality as you and thus will only press DELAY if he believes you will not press EVADE. You could promise not to press it, but it would be irrational for you to keep that promise so Bob rightly does not believe it. However, it would be rational for you to engage the impenetrable cover or take the serum that prevents you from pressing EVADE.
 
There is no rational irrationality. Your goal of maximizing your money is not self-defeating. This all seems like the most obvious, unarguable stuff in the world. So I dont see why Parfit is so confused about it.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July  1, 2010
 
Huh? What does this Parkinsons guy say you should do? This post is confusing because it only says the situation and what you would do (which I agree with). How can you debunk something if I dont even know what it is? Granted, you did say what he seems to suggest for one of them, but that was pretty vague.
 
posted by Steve
 on July  1, 2010 #
 
Which claim of Parfits are you debunking? There are a lot of claims in the book.
 
posted by 
 on July  1, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: June 29, 2010
 
Title: Management, Organizing, Mobilizing
 
Management is art of getting people who work for you to accomplish things. Its a subtle and fascinating art, the applied version of my great intellectual love, sociology. Its usually practiced badly, but even when done badly it can accomplish incredible things. One person can only do so much on their owntheir time, their powers, their creativity are all limited. But even an incompetent manager, who uses only a fraction of the powers of her employees, is capable of accomplishing tasks far beyond the range of any single person.
 
Organizing is the art of getting people who dont work for you to accomplish things. Many of the underlying concepts are the same but the execution is vastly more difficult. You dont really get to pick your people. The people you get dont simply follow instructions, they must be persuaded and cajoled and made to understand your vision. But when it works, they accomplish great things you never would have allowed them to try.
 
Organizing has many forms. The obvious one is where you take a batch of volunteers and try to shape them into a manageable force. The best are selected, developed, promoted, and taught to do the same. It is like traditional management in reverse: instead of starting with the top of a hierarchy and building down through hiring, you start with a bunch of people at the bottom and try to build them up through training and promotion.
 
But organizing also means finding other leaders, people embedded in management structures (organizations) of their own, and using them toward a common goal. Sometimes this means explicit direction of their efforts, as in a coalition, where you get the heads of various groups to all work on a common project, or sometimes its simply having them lend their name or knowledge to the cause. A great organizer of this sort develops rich networks they can quickly call upon in need. (Journalists can be good organizers in this sense, developing connections with sources and experts they can leverage to create a story.)
 
Organizing is most prevalent in my own field of politics, where the work I tend to do is often called online organizing. This term usually means the kind of stuff you see on the MoveOn mailing list: emails asking you to call your senator, host a house party, attend a vigil  but mostly tell your friends and give us money. Since I got into this business, cranky old-timers have been yelling at me that organizing people over the Internet is impossible, that you have to organize people face-to-face. This struck me as a ridiculous claim (and still does), but I think I now see the truth these critics are reacting to.
 
Online organizing is a huge misnomer. Sending emails to millions isnt organizing, any more than writing company wide memos is managing. It does not teach people new skills or persuade them of a larger vision or get them to continue the work themselves. It takes people where they are and gives them small things they can do from there.
 
Mobilizing can be done thru any medium. The folks who knock on your door to ask for your vote (or donation) are face-to-face mobilizers. You can do the same by telephone or television (call now to contribute!). It is, however, a one-way relationship. You are simply a number on a list.
 
But this doesnt mean online organizing is impossible, just that it isnt often done. Obviously its much harder than mere mobilizationand much more complicatedbut its much more rewarding as well. It is what makes for a successful open source project, or a thriving online community. The problem is one of scale  and thats true when its done through any medium. IAF and ACORN never had five million members. Still, this seems to be the genuinely important question: whether the scaling power of the Internet allows for a revolution in the scale of real organizing. I dont know, but the first step toward answering it is being clear about what it means.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 29, 2010
 
I started to read this article, but it gave me no clear reason why I should know this stuff. Whats the significance?
 
posted by Steve O'Brien
 on June 30, 2010 #
 
Good article. It reminds me of Linux kernel development. Very few people understand how Linux development really works. Imagine:
 
There are no managers. Thousands of developers work on whatever they want. The stable release series were canceled. There is no fixed release schedule. Over ten thousand lines of low-level C code are added every day (on average, including weekends and holidays).  Its some of the deepest, most technical, bare-metal programming youll ever see.  There are 100s of maintained forks, and 1000s of unmaintained forks. No version control system was suitable, so they wrote their own.
 
Sounds like a nightmare, right? Except that Linux is one of the most successful software projects EVER. Its making major inroads on everything from cell phones to super computers, from TVs to servers.
 
I think Open Source can teach something to political organizers. It may seem that the analogy has limits: political organization seems much more physical (location-based).
 
But look at OpenStreetMap. Its very location-based, but extremely self-organizing and successful. Because its goals are online (and visible to all), people can do work with minimal F2F co-ordination.
 
The key to online organizing just might be the right software. Wikis and blogs dont lend themselves to action much. The right software would turn political organizing into a game like GeoCaching.
 
posted by Anonymouse
 on June 30, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: June 21, 2010
 
Title: Brought to You by the Letter S
 
When youre writing laws, changing the smallest details can have huge effects. But Ive never seen anything as big as what happened this week, when the White House gutted an entire section of financial regulation by removing the letter s.
 
Right now, shareholders of big companies vote to decide who will be on the board of directors by filling out a mail-in ballot called a proxy card. But currently the corporations CEO gets to decide whos on the card! The result is a board hand-picked by the CEO  and they return the favor by providing CEOs with exorbitant salaries.
 
The current financial regulation bill  in a provision passed by both the House and Senate  would change that by allowing shareholders with 5% of the stock to come together and propose additional names for the ballot. But the White House is trying to gut this proposal at the last minute, and theyve done it in an incredibly sneaky way  they removed the letter s from the end of the word shareholders.
 
Now instead of shareholders whose stock adds up to 3% coming together, you have to be a single shareholder with 5% of the stock all by yourself. And for most big companies, there just isnt anyone like that. Take GE, for example  its biggest shareholder only owns about 3.4% of the company.
 
So by removing a single letter, they managed to make this provision completely useless.
 
The White House is being barraged by major CEOs begging them to keep fighting for this provision  after all, no CEO wants to see their lavish salaries cut! As Barney Frank put it, I think there are some people in the White House who think, Well, were fighting the financial institutions, but why fight with some of the others, you know, the other corporations? Apparently theyre so scared of a fight, theyre willing to gut a provision passed by both the House and Senate.
 
If youre interested in fighting for real corporate reform, please sign our petition to the White House:
 
Stop lobbying against shareholder power in corporate decision-making  and against protections that would finally rein in CEO pay. Thats not change we can believe in.
 
Add your name:
 
Sign
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 21, 2010
 
Where exactly is this petition form going? How might I distinguish it from a spam registration form? Whats the privacy policy?
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on June 21, 2010 #
 
Links or it didnt happen
 
posted by z
 on June 22, 2010 #
 
As a US citizen living abroad, how would I sign this petition? My zip is not recognised.
 
posted by Amelia Luzzi
 on June 22, 2010 #
 
If its on BoingBoing, its gotta be true, right?
 
But really - some sort references/link would make me more convinced this is the real deal.
 
posted by Swetch
 on June 22, 2010 #
 
Heres a HuffPo story about it:
 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/06/17/white-house-guts-reform-t_n_615952.html
 
The petition is run by PCCC, our privacy policy is here:
 
http://boldprogressives.org/privacy
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on June 22, 2010 #
 
Bolshevik!
 
posted by 
 on June 22, 2010 #
 
Youre all nuts.  How dare YOU try to dictate others ability to succeed.  Is it because youre jealous?  Cant cut it on your own?  Do you not have a freaking clue about what once made this country successful?  It wasnt called the land of opportunity for nothing!  Grow up and mind your own business kiddies!
 
posted by RealAmerican
 on June 22, 2010 #
 
Re: How dare YOU try to dictate others ability to succeed.
 
Um, this is about employers (ie. shareholders) being allowed to set the salaries of the CEOS that work for them, which is completely reasonable and has nothing to do with stifling success. If anything, its better for success of the companies because it blocks CEOS from bleeding the company with ultra-high salaries and bonuses  that is, as I understand it, it stops corrupt boards/management from stealing from the companies theyre supposed to be running for the shareholders.
 
posted by Shannon Larratt
 on June 22, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: June 20, 2010
 
Title: The Political Philosophy of Toy Story 3
 
[SPOILER WARNING: This is pretty much all spoilers, so please seem the movie before reading. Its a really, really good movie  probably the best Disney film. So you should totally see it. First.]
 
UPDATE: I missed a bunch the first time I saw the movie; this version has been amended to include the subthemes about immigration and socialization.
 
The film begins with Woody trying to defend a crumbling system of communism (presumably the Soviet Union). Toys have a duty to their owners, he argues. The owner is a personified totalitarian state (Stalin?)  he decides what the toys do and the toys are not permitted to escape. For some reason (false consciousness?), the other toys instinctively agree with this but find the notion hard to sustain when their owner makes clear he doesnt want them anymore (massive unemployment).
 
The last straw is when, through a comic mishap, they get the misimpression their owner is trying to throw them away. They feel this existential threat releases them from their duty of loyalty.1 The states one duty to its citizens is to keep them alive; if it cant do that, the system falls apart. Note, however, that its only the misimpression that removes the duty. When they learn (from Mrs. Potato Head) that they were mistaken and Andy only planned to put them in the attic, they rush to return to him. The attic wont actually kill them and so doesnt remove the duty.
 
Communism having collapsed, the toys emigrate to Sunnyside (the US, that nation of immigrants), which leader Lotso depicts as a libertarian paradise. In his introductory he speech, he touts the joys of self-ownership and interacting with children through the market (new children are constantly replacing old ones, maximizing the efficiency of the toys), as well as the improved material comforts his system brings (the repair depot, the dream house). The toys are enchanted.
 
However, they quickly realize libertarian paradise is actually a far worse nightmare than communism. Lotso explains that immigrants have to work their way up, starting by doing the painful, backbreaking jobs that the current population (all former immigrants themselves) wont do. There are a couple exceptions: Barbie is taken as a (Russian) mail-order bride and the entrepreneurial Buzz is chosen for promotion to the managerial class and resocialized so he wont sympathize with his old comrades.2
 
Sunnsides supposed freedom is actually slavery, complete with military discipline (via the reset Buzz) and a panopticon prison (via the monkey and symbolized by the treehouse). Their days are spent in torturous labor from which there is no real escape. Lotso has used his freedom to accumulate all the power for himself and does not allow any for anyone else.
 
Meanwhile, Woody is adopted by Bonnies benevolent dictatorship. People are given a second chance there  they can adopt new names, new identities, and spend their days doing improv. They do work under Bonnies direction, but they do so voluntarily, and are free to leave if she becomes a tyrant. As Andy makes clear at the end of the film, it is Bonnie who owes a duty to the toys, not vice versa.
 
Back at Sunnyside, the toys overthrow Lotsos capitalist domination by working together, harnessing the collective power of the working class and using the managerial class (i.e. Ken and Bookworm) against itself (via deception and torture!). But their success eventually persuades some members of the managerial class to become their allies (e.g. Ken, despite having been tortured3, and ultimately Lotsos right-hand toy, Big Baby) and at a key moment they together overthrow the capitalist Lotso, as Barbie gives a rousing speech nailing the key flaw with libertarianism: authority should derive from the consent of the governed, not the threat of force.
 
However, the new revolutionaries also leave, preventing them from installing themselves as a new dictatorship of the proletariat. And in a final act betraying that he is finally beginning to question communism, Woody asks Andy (surely his first request of the state in his entire life!) that his comrades be given to Bonnie. Andy agrees, and takes the extra step of giving Woody to Bonnie as well, finally dissolving his duties to the state.
 
Meanwhile, Ken and Barbie now lead Sunnyside, making it a fun and groovy socialist utopia. (Its actual day-to-day operation is, of course, left vague, but there is apparently lots of dancing in the streets.) Having risen up and overthrown Lotso, the toys can now operate on the basis of mutual equality. A happy ending for everyone.
 
The same seems to apply to the Green Army Men who leave earlier, but only because they (pretty reasonably) believe theyre going to get thrown away even when other toys just go to the attic.
 
Very Street Corner Society, so another possible reading is that theyre fleeing fascist Italy.
 
Perhaps Ken realizes that he will get to lead a Lotso-less Sunnsyside?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 20, 2010
 
This all very cool, except for one tiny part.
 
Lotso is not a capitalist. A capitalist would let everyone act in their own self interest. Hes a socialist at best, because in socialism, everyone is forced to work within the system, or the system doesnt work.
 
Power to the toys!
 
posted by Conrad Walton
 on June 20, 2010 #
 
The film begins with Andy trying to defend a crumbling system of feudalism.
 
s/Andy/Woody/
 
posted by 
 on June 20, 2010 #
 
Conrad, if you prefer lets call Lotso a fascist.  That is preferable to your misunderstanding of both Capitalism and Socialism.
 
posted by Jay
 on June 20, 2010 #
 
MY misunderstanding? Do you know any history? But, OK.
 
We can meet on common ground that hes a Fascist. I agree with that.
 
posted by 
 on June 20, 2010 #
 
s/Molly/Bonnie. Molly is Andys sister and she doesnt figure much in the movie. Bonnie is little girl that gets Andys toys in the end.
 
posted by kmeme
 on June 20, 2010 #
 
Meanwhile, Woody is adopted by Mollys mixed economy. People are given a second chance there  they can adopt new names, new identities and spend their days doing improv. They do work under Mollys direction, but they do so voluntarily, and are free to leave if she becomes a tyrant. As Andy makes clear at the end of the film, it is Molly who owes a duty to her toys, not vice versa.
 
This sounds libertarian.
 
posted by Arne
 on June 21, 2010 #
 
Your political characterization is either extremely confused or the film itself is confused.
 
Lotso is clearly a fascist dictator, in favor of central controlhis control.
 
Molly is the libertariannothing mixxed about the value system espoused. Here societal arrangements are voluntary. Mutual equality is paramount here, not in the socialist state run by Ken & Barbie, despite what they may claim.
 
Any socialist state really means communist state, which means central control, which brings you directly back to Lotso, do not collect $200.
 
State socialism always results in an exclusive power class controlling the working class. Thats not equality when another citizen has coercive and arbitrary power over you, thats dictatorship by central unipolar party.
 
Mollys libertarian state is the closest to mutual equality you can get, a society based on contract between equals and mutual respect among free citizens.
 
The left today continually seeks central control, more state power. The right today seeks less central control, more individual power.
 
That makes fascism, totalitarianism, and communism a leftist phenomena,  makes libertarianism and individualism a rightist phenomena. Though, using the relative terms left and right should be abandoned because they are relativistic and neither descriptive nor precise.
 
posted by Anen
 on June 21, 2010 #
 
This interpretation is faulty because the toys are always considered objects in the film - object who require - even desire ownership.
 
Lotso was promoting a socialist paradise, only to have to use force to implement his scheme (ie Obamacare).
 
Woody talked of how the toys wouldnt like life without ownership.  They found out that not having an owner meant neglect, and kids who didnt really care about them.
 
Lotsos socialist paradise turned out to be bondage.
 
Bonnie, on the other hand, provided ownership, and thus care.  Mixed market?  Bwa-ha!  Talk about a forced analogy.
 
Your analysis was overly complicated because you wanted to inject your own politics into it, and thus had to insert a few of your own ideas.
 
Interesting read nonetheless.
 
posted by Ike
 on June 21, 2010 #
 
Its not about feudalism versus capitalism or libertarianism, or left versus right. The Lotso regime is a satire of modern industry of any kind, and the desires that fuel it. There are two themes interacting:
 
For the toys, the world of Andy and Bonnie represent their own commitment to each other and to a greater purpose. Their labor is directly meaningful, in that they are helping to raise a child, each using their full personality and abilities. In Marxist terms, their labor is unalienated. However, that also means that it can come to a natural end. This threatens to dissolve the bonds between the toys, and it may force them into obsolescence and death.
 
Lotsos regime begins with his traumatic experience of being discarded and replaced. Lotsos insight is that by putting all trust in one communal project (Daisy) he incurs great risks if he is ejected from that community. Unwilling to accept this, he devises a system of modern industrial relations and alienated labor. No one relationship is as important, and in principle the toys can have a much greater quantities of gainful employment.
 
However, it turns out, that once intimate relationships are dissolved, the labor  which was once a joy  becomes a living hell. Children do not care for toys and the toys do not get to know any individual child. Instead of providing greater surplus, the new regime threatens to bodily destroy the toys, day by day. Lotso tries to keep the toys quiescent by holding out the promise of possibly, one day, joining the elites, whose work is not so destructive to the body. But, during the revolt, we learn that this labor may be even more corrosive to the soul, as it involves guard labor  keeping the others in line  and denying your true self (Kens latent desires for a more generally groovy lifestyle).
 
Its too simple to call this a satire of capitalism or communism. Its the 21st century and we basically have two kinds of state/crony capitalism vying for dominance. I would argue that its a satire of how human relationships are crushed by alienation, in both kinds of systems.
 
Anyway, all this came about because Lotso tried to find a way to break the cycle of life in such a way that he would never be harmed again. But this choice leads them all directly to a potential early death (the incinerator). I have never seen death so unflinchingly portrayed in a childrens story before. But even here, death is shown as a form of recycling.
 
The ending (with the same painted clouds as the beginning) shows that avoiding change is pointless and the best hope is to embrace new purposes, new projects, and new human relations. Were aware now that the toys arent immortal, but if they stick together, they can have many fruitful adventures with Bonnie and maybe even other owners beyond her.
 
Are we overthinking it? I dont think so. The people at Pixar are smart. All the great childrens stories deal with great themes.
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on June 22, 2010 #
 
However, it turns out, that once intimate relationships are dissolved, the labor  which was once a joy  becomes a living hell.
 
I think this misses the key point that its only the babies who make the toys lives hell. Life with the older kids seems genuinely quite lovely. And the toys in the latter camp are not strictly the elites; there are many beyond Lotsos inner circle. I dont see why the movie would cheer on the new toys being welcomed into a more fun and groovy version of Sunnyside if it thought alienated labor was trying to critique alienated labor as a whole.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on June 22, 2010 #
 
Therefore what?  You try to lay out a political philosophy but leave out the conclusion and any real analysis.  Anyone can identify what they think is happening in the movie, look at your comments so far, but you really should follow this up with what you think it all means.  In other words, why does your philosophy identification matter?
 
posted by Seth W
 on June 22, 2010 #
 
Neil nails it.
 
posted by 
 on June 24, 2010 #
 
A nice thought exercise, indeed, but the OP seems to be confused. The various political ideologies used in this article lack definitional rigor; the terms are thrown around way too loosely and do not really adhere or follow any of the events in the movie. In any event, Toy Story 3 is more of an existential narrative than a critique of political systems. I tend to agree most with Neils comment:
 
Its too simple to call this a satire of capitalism or communism. Its the 21st century and we basically have two kinds of state/crony capitalism vying for dominance. I would argue that its a satire of how human relationships are crushed by alienation, in both kinds of systems.
 
posted by Brooklyn
 on June 24, 2010 #
 
P.S. For anyone interested in reading a great article on humanism and Toy Story (1&2 only), go here:
 
http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1374/is_2_60/ai_60100167/
 
posted by Brooklyn
 on June 24, 2010 #
 
Neil did indeed nail it.
 
Nice work.
 
But bringing it back to politics, this take from Neil would suggest the film promotes liberal philosophy, progressive liberal philosophy in particular-
 
shows that avoiding change is pointless and the best hope is to embrace new purposes, new projects, and new human relations.
 
A film about accepting change? Hello? Who just ran on a theme of change?
 
embracing change in human relations?  that sound like social conservatives? ( this one could easily refer to gay marriage or the changing face of America / growth of minorities )
 
Lotso feeling discarded and replaced has direct parallels to American Conservative rhetoric and sentiments- jobs being replaced overseas, illegals flooding over the border to, ultimately, replace all the real Americansminorities ultimately replacing whites.
 
Lotso is the cruelty of CapitalismDaisy is the maternal nanny state.
 
new collective purpose? new projects of mutual benefit and mutual ( shared ) interest? sounds like Socialism to meor at least the WPA.
 
I think Aaron has it correct. Look at the personality types of the different characters.
 
and Fascism is generally classified, as well as thought of, as a Right Wing phenomena.
 
Scholars generally consider fascism to be on the far right of the conventional left-right political spectrum. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fascism
 
Fascism is a form of extreme right-wing ideology that celebrates the nation or the race as an organic community transcending all other loyalties. It emphasizes a myth of national or racial rebirth after a period of decline or destruction. To this end, fascism calls for a spiritual revolution against signs of moral decay such as individualism and materialism, and seeks to purge alien forces and groups that threaten the organic community. 
 
http://www.publiceye.org/eyes/whatfasc.html
 
Fascism, which was not afraid to call itself reactionary does not hesitate to call itself illiberal and anti-liberal.
Benito Mussolini
 
posted by Dovia
 on July  1, 2010 #
 
See, I read that movie entirely differently.  I saw Lotso the Bear (Russia) as Stalin, and the clown guy as Leon trotsky, with the baby probably representing the Soviet Military.  Lotso exiled Trotsky.
 
posted by Matthew
 on March 25, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: June 18, 2010
 
Title: That Sounds Smart
 
How do you tell if what someone is saying is smart? Most peoples first instinct is to think that things they cant understand must be smart. After all, to say such things they must have learned them and arent people who have learned more about something generally smarter than people who havent? Thus the common phenomena of people trusting jargon-laden statements.
 
One problem with this method is simply that jargon can be faked. Its not too hard to make up a bunch of longish words that sound complicated. And if you dont understand them, youll have a hard time telling whether theyre real or made up.
 
But the more serious problem is that this method is exactly backwards. Smart people actually say things that are very simple and easy to understand. And the smarter they are, the more clear what they say is. Its stupid people who say things that are hard to understand.
 
Part of this is because stupid people say things that arent true, things that arent true dont make sense, and things that dont make sense are hard to understand. But you can also look at it from the other end: if you genuinely understand something  really, truly understand it  then it doesnt seem complicated and you can explain it rather simply.
 
But the larger consequence is that if youre smart the world doesnt seem very complicated. This might seem obvious, but the obvious thought is rather different. The obvious thought is: The world doesnt seem complicated to smart people. But this isnt what smart people actually think. They think the world isnt complicated, period.
 
This is because when they try to explain part of the world they understand to someone, they explain it clearly, and, as a result, that person now understands it. This is proof that its not just uncomplicated for them, its uncomplicated for everyone.
 
But, I suspect, for most people the world is a strange and mysterious place, governed by principles they do not understand, which affect them severely but cannot be controlled, only coped with as best as possible. This is certainly how most people regard their computers.
 
By contrast, when I listen to smart people some part of the world I only dimly understood or never considered becomes immediately clear. Even if I dont agree, I never have any trouble understanding. Listening to them, is like breathing pure oxygen and I cannot get enough.
 
This means the tradeoff between being expert and being popular doesnt actually exist. People who truly understand their subject should have no trouble writing for a popular audience. And, in fact, their writing will probably better than that of the professional popularizers.
 
A good example of this was the early days of the blog Freakonomics. It had two writers, a successful economist and a popular journalist. The two had worked together on the bestselling book of the same name, with the general assumption that it was the journalist who had made the economists work clear. But reading their individual posts on the blog, you could see it was the reverse: the economist was a much clearer writer than the journalist.
 
Another result is that you find the really smart things in unexpected and undervalued places. Smart writing wont be in formal and difficult-to-understand journal articles, but in the profanity-laced angry rants youll find on someones blog. Thats where the smart people are, even if everybody else just thinks theyre dumb.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 18, 2010
 
This is incorrect.
 
Stupid people have no difficulty in seeing the world as uncomplicated.
 
Exhibit A: Sarah Palin.
 
Now, it is true that stupid people are unable to produce cogent explanations (see again, Sarah Palin), but that doesnt mean they dont see the world as simple.
 
On the other side of the coin, the more you know about an issue, the more you see the tradeoffs and complications involved.
 
For example, a moderately bright person might say, We can use the market to solve the education problem with vouchers. Or another moderately bright person might say, The problem with schools is that some parents dont invest much in their childrens education, so we need strong public schools to level the playing field.
 
A brighter person might then say, There is a deeper problem: different parents invest a different amount in their child. Vouchers will exacerbate this problem by allowing involved parents to segregate their children. On the other hand, it may lead to some general improvements in schools. So, to tell which of these two effects will dominate, we will need empirical tests which will lead to mixed results that we will then dissect and  
 
The world is complicated, and the more you know the more complicated it gets!
 
Now, it is true that in general the smarter one is, the better one is at explaining a given problem, but on the flip side, the smarter one is, the bigger problems one can tackle, and bigger problems eventually run up against the limits of human comprehension, which means the quality of ones prose tends to degrade again.
 
Its like the old UNIX joke, You have to be smarter to debug something than to program it, so never program at your highest level or you wont be able to debug it. The same thing happens in a lot of other complicated fields. You can just barely work out a solution, but since you dont have any left over brain power, you cant simplify it down to be understandable.
 
posted by Carl
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
As above, your theory works well until it breaks down with the truly complicated.
 
For example Richard Feynman has a famous quote I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics.
 
posted by Morfaine
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
At the risk of sounding dumb by using jargon, Id like to refute comment #1 by pointing out that the original proposition smart people see the world as uncomplicated (p->q) says nothing about its inverse statement stupid people see the world as complicated (~p->~q).
 
posted by Mike Tung
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
I feel more confused after reading the authors post and reader comments.
 
Smart is an abstract notion and will and could be tumbled around in the minds of hot air machines forever.
 
posted by Tom
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
Hum, I have to take issue with this: in my experience most of the smartest people I know are painfully aware of how LITTLE they know of way the world works - especially in adjacent sub-fields, but also experts in string theory will admit cluelessness in European regional politics and vice versa, and there is a fractally enormous and practically infinite knowledge-space to navigate: the internalising you talk of (which, OK, is key to enabling good education of others in the subject) is something that unavoidably takes time to aquire.
 
posted by Ian.S
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
stupid people say things that arent true, things that arent true dont make sense
 
You are assuming that people try to make sense of things. Most people, stupid or not, happily take whatever comfort their vision of the world or reject facts that would disprove it; and try to make sense of neither.
 
And yes, stupid people (ab)use common sense instead of trying to make sense.
 
Take any argument from Palin, or You have to be a little suspicious of any study that says children being raised by same-sex couples do better or have superior outcomes to children raised with a mother and father, she said. It just defies common sense and reality. For instance.
 
posted by xavier
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
In defense of people who succomb to the I dont understand what hes saying so he must be smart, theres probably often an element of remembering not understanding stuff in school.  Also, some truths are counterintuitive, e.g. in statistics.
 
posted by binky
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
For example Richard Feynman has a famous quote I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics.
 
But that wasnt because it was complicated, it was just because there was nothing to understand  its just weird.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
The world is very complicated. Ideologues are the only class of people who could think that the world is simple. Some of them are smart, and even if they are, they can be extremely stupid (see the post).
 
posted by Jeremy
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
Aaron, I studied physics, I was a military officer, I studied medicine, and Ive taught myself enough about computing to start working my way through SICP. Im pretty sure I can at least follow most conversations in hard and soft sciences and national and international politics. Let me share a few things.
 
First, as Einstein said, make things as simple as possible, but not simpler. The implied admission: things are complicated. Experts have the capacity to deal with the complications. Doctors arent doctors because they can determine that if you have high blood pressure then you need a beta blocker. You can figure that out on your own. Doctors can anticipate and deal with the complications most likely for your high blood pressure. Physicists spend a vast amount of their time struggling at the boundaries between physics and some other domain (chemistry, electrical engineering, computing): where do the quantum systems become so complex that they become something else?
 
The previous Palin examples are great counterexamples to your postulate: any idiot can sound simple.
 
Your conclusion that the smart people hang out in blogs is also easily dispatched. Maybe you should try reading the literature, and hanging out with some smart people in hospitals and research universities.
 
As for the Feynman quote: quantum mechanics is complicated. Its not just weird. The mental gymnastics necessary to work out quantum physics is staggering. And thats after making as many simplifications as we can possibly justify. Feynman diagrams are a great example of just how complicated quantum physics is. The math is so hard we wash away piles of paper and think about ultra-simplified diagramatic representations of a small subset of the reality instead.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
The world is complicated, and the more you know the more complicated it gets!
 
Nope, I actually think it usually follows a hill pattern. It initially seems simple. Then, with a little bit of knowledge, it seems complicated (since you dont really understand it). Then once you understand it really well, it seems simple again.
 
My answer to the specific question of education is the subject of the book chapter im currently working on, so I hope youll excuse me if I dont get into it here.
 
The mental gymnastics necessary to work out quantum physics is staggering.
 
Well, yes, doing hard math is hard. But thats different from it being complicated. Im talking about conceptual understanding, not the actual work involved in applying it.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
Weirdness is not an intrinsic property of things. It is simply evidence that your intuitions are wrong.
 
posted by 
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
Try learning some foreign languages and see how one-sided this discussion actually is. The world isnt only about nuances articulated in elegant simplicity, its also about getting a message across, even when clumsy and complicated is the only option. People learning and speaking foreign languages often forces this clumsy, complicated expression as they can find no other means at particular instances of communication (or its attempt). This is why I think its stupid to say that stupid people express themselves clumsily, with excessive complication, and because they have nothing to say.
 
But yeah, everybody MUST learn English. Just dont expect English native speakers to learn any other language: oh yeah, thats right, they might look stupid doing so I forgot.
 
No ill will though, man. I see what youre saying, but it only applies to exclusively native tongue domains. You should travel more.
 
posted by Mark
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
While I understand your point, I have to disagree. Defining complexity and dumbness through the invention of new words naturally comes with the specialization in a field of knowledge. True, there might be people (e.g. doctors) who misuse special terms to sound smart in front of their patients, but that has nothing to do with him being more or less intelligent. Used in the correct context (e.g. in a discussion with another doctor), the complex words are more than appropriate and may clearify things more than describing them in simpler words.
 
So: Dont judge people because they seem to use complex words in the wrong conversational context. The specialist might just overestimate your knowledge in that field.
 
posted by derLars
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
This is one of those posts youll look back at in ten years, and laugh, and laugh, and laugh.
 
posted by quinn
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
The feeling of understanding can, however, be deceptive. There are lots of high IQ, well read and honest (as in not consciously  trying to mislead) people who disagree about solutions to problems they both feel they understand and have easily explained (tough often differing) mental models of. The issue of vouchers in the first comment is a good example. The brighter person does not seem to realize that the greatest benefit of vouchers (according to some, including me) is that they will give an incentive to innovation. This is something that cannot be adequately  tested for in small controlled experiments. Your heuristic is great for detecting nonsense but it cant help you find truth.
 
posted by Arne
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
As the financial crisis eased, I recall hedge fund managers saying of the market: the first derivative is bad, but the second derivative is improving. Basically, the market is not falling as fast anymore. I knew then that these guys are morons repeating some jargon they heard their quant guys mumble. They use jargon inappropriately to impress others with their smartitude. This happens everywhere, and I have great fun poking through their paper thin understanding of the topic.
 
posted by Bob
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
Some truth to that.  Clear writing and smart thinking do seem to go together often enough.  Cutting out mumbo-jumbo is a big part of reaching good conclusions.
 
But like Arne says, clear thinking can still be wrong.  Someone can answer the wrong question or have their facts wrong or leave out important facts/arguments, and what they say can still sound brilliant.  Real-life thinking is just so much messier than theorem proving, where you can just read the argument and figure out if its right or not.  Conversely, smarts aint everything, and anybody can have a good idea (and express it well or badly).
 
(Concretely, a lot of people agree that Richard Dawkins The Selfish Gene is a model of clear writing and that the basic arguments about genes and memes work.  But people still disagree profoundly about how useful sociobiology and memetics are as models of the world, both as Dawkins lays them out and as others apply them.)
 
I really dont want to spend life dividing the world into smart people and dumb people.  Not because there arent people with different IQs out there, but because it does more harm than good to focus on it all the time.  If a genie offered me one superpower, Id probably want something other than smarts  like being more focused or bold or altruistic or capable of clear-eyed detachment or informed or able to get along with folks.
 
If I were, say, hiring people, smart would probably be a factor, but it still wouldnt be the dominating factor and hiring is a corner case anyway  hiring is all about judging people, and most of life isnt and shouldnt be.
 
Anyway, kudos for taking on the topic and being willing to say stuff in an unvarnished way  my carping isnt meant to take away from that.
 
posted by RF
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
I have never met anyone that I consider smart who actually thinks the world isnt complicated.  I suspect youre surrounding yourself with people who present attractive, but incomplete, analogies.
 
You might consider reading Dijkstras writings on radical novelties: http://userweb.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/transcriptions/EWD10xx/EWD1036.html
 
posted by Ben
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
Or, to put that constructively, some of the things that get my attention in a conversation are useful new information, trains of thought I hadnt considered (or hadnt considered enough), pointing out when we need to be considering a different question, making vague thoughts concrete, or edging towards conclusions we were afraid to reach.  They can all change the course of your thought process, and can come well expressed or badly by anybody.
 
Eli Pariser of MoveOn is, incongruously, a fan of Donald Rumsfelds phrase about the unknown unknowns, the ones we dont know we dont know.  Related to the whole problem of how its harder to be right than to be smart.  He talked about it when his alma mater invited him back as a commencement speaker: http://bit.ly/coId5u
 
posted by RF
 on June 18, 2010 #
 
Im sort of doubting the smart people think the world is not complicated thing.
 
And making things very simple is a skill at setting a very simple narrative to something. If the narrative was so smart then maybe it would come up with a simple solution toobut no, the world is complicated, and the narrative is over simplified. Causation can be simplified, but it is incomplete, because the world is complicated.
 
posted by Marcus
 on June 19, 2010 #
 
Richard Feynman and quantum physics is a perfect example of what Aaron wrote in his article. And in fact, Feynman goes into greath lengths to explain what it means (and doesnt mean) to understand quantum physics in his QED lectures.
 
http://vega.org.uk/video/programme/45
 
posted by Jarno Virtanen
 on June 20, 2010 #
 
I kind of agree with what youre saying, but Im not sure about some aspects.  I agree that people who understand their subject so thoroughly that they can explain things clearly to others are smart.  But Im not sure that means that people who cant do this arent smart.  I think what youre talking about at some level is communication skills which some people might not have.  Are you saying that communication skills are by definition part of being smart?  If so, you should define your terms because Im not sure most people think so.
 
I read somewhere that it took mathematicians a bit of work to validate Grigori Perelmans proof of the Poincare Conjecture.  This was in no small part due to the fact that his proof was confusing and unclear to read  a communication problem (and, yes, also because the machinery he was using was heavy  I would say complicated).  I dont know any mathematician today who would say his proof was simple or uncomplicated.  Do you think in a few years, or say 50 years, we will consider it simple?
 
posted by ps
 on June 29, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: April  7, 2010
 
Title: How to Get a Job Like Mine
 
[]
 
Apparently a lot of people have gotten the mistaken impression from my blog that I sit around and think about abstract philosophy all day. Well, I guess I do kind of do that, but my day job is actually much more exciting. Im a cofounder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee (BoldProgressives.org) and I spend my days experimenting with new ways to get progressive policies enacted and progressive politicians elected.
 
Like a lot of people, I grew up feeling frustrated with the world  extremes of wealth and poverty, insane and bloody wars, outdated intellectual monopoly laws, big corporations run amok. But I had no idea what to do about it. Writing just felt like preaching to the choir, marching in the streets felt like the protest of the powerless, working with people on the ground just didnt seem to scale.
 
But when my friend Larry Lessig decided to run for Congress, I begun to see that there was something I could do. During the short-lived campaign, we were besieged with offers of help from consultants, software companies, and services firms. Their technology was invariably outdated and incompetent (the leading tools are built on SQL Server), uncoordinated and poorly-designed. The advice they gave was horrendous, their incompetence bordered on sabotage, and the prices they charged would bankrupt us.
 
We started the Progressive Change Campaign Committee in January 2009 with the notion that we could fix all that. We would help filter the good consultants from the bad, write up best practices and conduct experiments to learn what works. Along the way, we got pulled into issue campaigns as well  at first going after CNBC for their terrible coverage of the economic crisis, then spending most of the last year getting Congress to pass a public option in the health care bill. Along the way, weve gotten over 400,000 members and raised over a million dollars for our various tactics. Not bad for our first year!
 
But now, as the 2010 campaigns ramp up, were getting back to our original mission. Weve been working with campaigns to help them find talented staff, competent consultants, and money-saving techniques. But we also need some talented programmers to build the next generation of campaign tools. Weve got some really exciting ideas, but we need your help.
 
So heres the ask: Want to work with me on building some amazing tools for some amazing campaigns? If so, just send me an email at aaron@boldprogressives.org or just fill out this form.
 
Then, tell your friends. Your country needs you.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April  7, 2010
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March 29, 2010
 
Title: A Reading Machine
 
One of the things that has long puzzled me is why children, who so incredibly pick up spoken language without formal instruction, encounter so much trouble when learning to read. Perhaps, I thought for a while, it is because there is a language organ that has specifically evolved to let them learn speech while reading has to be learned with more general portions of the brain. But the more I learn about neurology, the more ridiculous that seems.
 
In retrospect, the answer is rather obvious. Children learn a language because they are surrounded by it. Its unavoidable. Their world is full of people speaking it and the pattern matchers in their brains go to town, figuring out the structures underlying its grammar and associated its vocabulary with the other things they see around them.
 
Its impossible for there to be anything similar with words. Sure, some words appear in fairly regular positions (MEN on bathroom doors, perhaps) and children may learn to recognize them, but for the most part words are rather avoidable and their patterns hard to spot. How are children to draw a connection between the words in the newspaper and any sentences that they can understand? The only clues are the pictures and anyone whos read picturebooks to a kid knows that kids make valiant use of those few clues, but its simply not enough to let them learn to read.
 
Whats needed is a way to give children the additional clues they require, but at their own pace. An adult can read books but only reads linearly and soon gets bored of reading the same thing over and over again. (Ive often thought that children were being stupid by reading the same things over and over and over again. Now I realize Im the stupid one; its the kids who are being smart. Only through repetition can your brain see the patterns!) Its very difficult for children to pick up a pattern under such conditions.
 
But devices never get tired, so I would propose a device. Here is what I imagine: Give the child an iPad with a special program for reading books. The program provides a selection of nice picture books with words in large type underneath. Switching pages can be done the usual way; kids seem pretty good at figuring out gestural interfaces. But the big innovation is simply this: when you touch a word, it turns red while the speakers say it out loud.
 
In this way, the child can have the machine read the book to them. Tap the words in sequence and the book pronounces them. If a word is somehow unclear, just tap it again. When you finish the page, just go to the next one. When you finish a book, read another, or start over.
 
Soon, I imagine, the child will make some basic associations. They will learn that tapping the word the makes the sound thuh and means the. They will no longer need to tap it every time to find this out  they can save time by saying it out loud themselves. Eventually, they can just say it in their heads.
 
Pretty quickly, more and more common words can be handled this way. Then the child begins noticing patterns between common words. All the words beginning with k have a kuh sound! With such patterns recognized, some words can be sounded out. Eventually, only strange words need to be tapped  the rest the child can read by themselves.
 
People who have not spent much time around children might claim such a device will make children lazy  why learn to read when a device will do it for them? But children are desperate to read; those who cannot will often try to memorize the shorter books their parents read to them so they can pretend to read those books themselves. This device would simply give them the tools they need. It would lead their brains to make the same associations that the software makes occur physically: point at this word, hear this sound. And theres nothing are brains are better at than recognizing such simple patterns and being able to predict them in the future.
 
Perhaps this software already exists. If so, please tell me. If not, Id like to work with someone to make it. Will it work? Theres only one way to find out, but I think its got a pretty good shot.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 29, 2010
 
Have you ever seen the Leap Pad products? They do pretty much exactly what you describe here, and are a lot more Fisher-Price-durable than any iPad. My youngest is in 4th grade now, but theres no way I would have let her near an iPad-scale device while she was at learning-to-read age. Its a good thing that Leap Pad was TOUGH!
 
Walter
 
posted by Walter Davis
 on March 29, 2010 #
 
This problem is not as prevalent in more phonetic languages. My family and I were discussing this last weekend - in Russian, as soon as you learn the alphabet, you can read since you can just sound out the words one letter at a time, then say them faster, and in nearly every case, youll hear the word you just read.
 
posted by Pavel
 on March 29, 2010 #
 
I used to have this computer like toy as a kid - which is some 20 yrs ago.I think it was called Speak and Spell or something. All I remember about it was the it was some educational aid from TI, and had cassettes (?) with various kind of subject matter. What I had was for English, and it had various levels, and fun ways of enhancing your vocabulary - like a hangman game, where the device used to pronounce the word when it was fully shown.
 
posted by Divya
 on March 29, 2010 #
 
It was Speak and Spell. Found this online simulator for it: http://www.speaknspell.co.uk/
 
I am quite proud of myself for remembering the devices name, and that it was from TI, after so many years :)
 
posted by Divya
 on March 29, 2010 #
 
Pavels point is spot on.  English is an outlier among alphabetically encoded languages; for data on the effects of orthography on learning to read, see Foundation literacy acquisition in European orthographies <www.psycho.univ-paris5.fr/IMG/pdf/2003_Seymour.pdf>.
 
posted by Jack Rusher
 on March 29, 2010 #
 
There are a bunch of websites and games out there like this. My four-year-old daughter uses this one a lot:
 
http://www.starfall.com/n/level-a/learn-to-read/play.htm?f
 
Although these devices and applications have their place, my sense is hands-on personal training is far more effective (if time consuming). Children seem to absorb differently with human interaction rather than machine, as Im sure all people do. I taught my daughter to read with this book:
 
http://www.startreading.com/
 
Its at least my intuition that an automated/machine-based approach would have been a very poor substitute.
 
posted by Adam Rosi-Kessel
 on March 29, 2010 #
 
The difference ist, that language is natural while writing, reading and by that also letters are manmade. Out brain is not made for reading. 
Im not sure you can find this one in english. Worth reading, though
http://tinyurl.com/ycp9u8z
 
posted by whatever
 on March 29, 2010 #
 
One difference between this and the way they learn vocal language is that the kids wont be producing written language, just consuming it. I wonder if a kid who used a system like this would be relatively behind in their spelling skills?
 
Ive heard it claimed that theres been some decline in ability to remember all the strokes of characters among Chinese and Japanese speakers, because of word processors that let you type the word phonetically then pick the right character from a list. The technique only provides practice with recognition skills, not production skills.
 
posted by Chris
 on March 29, 2010 #
 
I work IT in a school system and Kurzweil 3000 does exactly this.
 
You basically scan in a textbook (or any printed matter) and it reads it back to the kids. They can repeat sentences, words, etc. as they need.
 
The teacher in charge swears by it for helping less developed and challenged students.
 
Its also about $3K for the basic package.
 
posted by A dude
 on March 30, 2010 #
 
How have (or could) these ideas be applied to adults learning a second language? Since reading seems to be a less primal language ability, should initial adult language learning be entirely aural (as it certainly is in some immersion programs)?
 
posted by Patrick White
 on March 30, 2010 #
 
I have seen variations of what you are describing. There are toys like Leap Pad, just go to a Target and look in the childrens section. Baby Einstein brand has something similar as well. I also recall an MIT Media Lab/TED video that touched on similar technology.
 
Most children learn to read naturally unless there is a developmental problem. You might want to read up about childrens developmental stages (Piaget for example), and different pedagogies (Waldorf, Montessori, Emilio Reggiano, etc).
 
Some schools like Waldorf dont teach a child to read/write till much later unless the child shows an interest. Theres something to be said for letting a child be a child. One of the ways to help with speech for example is through music (Kodalys theories). My child had Kodaly music lessons and he is highly verbal predominantly in English with comprehension in Cantonese and Mandarin.  I think the best way to encourage a child to learn at this developmental stage is with play. Hence the Leap Pad toys.
 
posted by winnie
 on March 30, 2010 #
 
DAISY digital talking book, NISO standard:
http://www.daisy.org/daisy-standard
 
posted by kcoyle
 on March 30, 2010 #
 
Im of two minds on this.  The first is do whatever it takes to help a child learn.  And the second is what of the divine lesson of being told to go look it up for yourself?
 
Then there is a bias to be considered of putting something that functions like a book in their hands besides books.
 
So oh, yeah, from infancy on kids can get these things that do the distracting things the regular NotBooks so diddling about the interface becomes a baby thing and not a distraction as they get older (major consideration.)
 
I think you ought to go back to coming up with a program to use OCR as a penmanship program that will have all earthlings writing in the same style which has been based on Jokerman Font.
 
Oh wait, thats what Im working on.
 
So if a word has multiple definitions what?  The kid answers a multiple choice question or is the definition determined by how it is used (pre-programed?) A good exercise might be to allow the child to insert the definition in place of the word.
 
But I dont know.  Once you start with stuff like exposing kids to the complexity of language its going be hard to keep them bamboozled by the complexity of adult life.  Which is largely just pursuit of childish wants on a grand scale.
 
I cant imagine that you arent already aware of this or something like this, but the NY Times site pops up a little box with a question mark in it when any text area is selected.  Click the box and either a definition for a single word or search suggestions for a group of words or a name appears in a new window.
 
posted by James Hardy
 on March 30, 2010 #
 
There is a wide body of research on such sight word or look and say methods. Start here: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reading_education.
 
posted by Cyrus Omar
 on April  1, 2010 #
 
While some writing systems are more phonetic than English, others are much less so.  If you think learning to read English is a challenge, try Chinese or Japanese.
 
posted by Theognis
 on April  2, 2010 #
 
the tech exists, but I cant imagine that it would substitute well for a person reading aloud to their kid, the classic way to teach someone to read. Youd miss inflection, association with pictures, digression to answer questions, funny faces, etc. etc not to mention all the warmth and love that comes from being read to.
 
I learned to read very early, and I have a very clear memory of it: of the patterns of letters falling into place on the page, like coming into focus. I think theres a level of learned abstraction there  the print can be not just spoken but read  that might (?) be confused if the print also read itself.
 
posted by phoebe
 on April 25, 2010 #
 
FWIW, I could read fluently by age 4  even though no one explicitly taught me. My father just did that accidentally: every day he would sit me on his lap and read to me from some book he would put in my lap, while carefully tracing the words he was reading with his index finger.
 
It didnt take the pattern matcher in my brain a very long time to catch on.
 
And once Id learned to read Greek, German then followed soon after I learned to speak it.
 
So I would actually dispute your assertion that its impossible for there to be anything similar with words.
 
I would even dispute the need for this to happen at the childs pace. Children dont have the luxury of picking their pace when they learn spoken language and I dont think its essential in written language either.
 
All they need is ample opportunity to learn connections between spoken words and their written equivalents. The rest they will do themselves  and pretty much inevitably.
 
posted by Aristotle Pagaltzis
 on April 26, 2010 #
 
A kind of inverse application of voice synthesizers that has been used and studied since the mid-1980s has been in college remedial writing programs where a students error-filled composition is typed into a Kurzweil voice-synthesizer.  The student then hears his composition being read aloud.  Since the synthesized voice is quite obviously not human, the student does not feel mocked or threatened by having the errors read aloud, and indeed often feels as though he is participating in a game, but one is which he is learning that a writer has to be a reader of his own work as well as just a writer.  Some interesting research has been done on the effectiveness of such devices, and most have been quite positive on the technique.
 
posted by Andrew Gurcak
 on June 17, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March 16, 2010
 
Title: The Anti-Suit Movement
 
I dont like wearing suits. In part, this is simply a question of personal taste  I find them uncomfortable and overpriced, and I dont like the way they look. But its also a question of principle. Suits  and the other trappings of respect that go with them, like titles and sirs and the rest  are the physical evidence of power distance, the entrenchment of a particular form of inequality.
 
As a result, when I go to events I try to avoid wearing a suit if I can. But sometimes not wearing a suit just feels really out of place. When you show up to a room of people in suits wearing a t-shirt and jeans, people dont think youre taking a brave stand on principle; they just think youre unkempt.
 
Yet these things do change. In the 1950s, college kids went to class in suits and addressed their professors as sir. The 1960s changed all that. Today, at most colleges, wearing a suit to class would be the weird thing to do.
 
This seems like a traditional collective action problem. If one person doesnt wear a suit, they seem weird, but if everyone doesnt wear a suit, theyre all fine. But the idea of doing political organizing around not wearing a suit just seems bizarre. Its hard to know who to organize  each event has a different group of people  and even if you could find the people and they agreed with you, asking folks to join a no-suit pact just seems weird.
 
So suits are emblematic of this strange kind of politico-cultural issue  a political question thats not amenable to a political solution. And yet, from the 1960s, we know that these battles can be won. Does anyone know how?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 16, 2010
 
Well the answer from the 60s is surely that if your small issue (not wanting to wear suits) gets coupled to a big issue (not wanting to go to Vietnam) in the minds of many people, then it goes along for the ride.
 
Of course how to arrange such a coupling is another question
 
But there are other ways not to wear suits. Wearing jeans and a T-shirt is simply unkempt, but showing up in a nice kilt, or a kurta, or a Madiba shirt (according to location or genealogy) is a good start. Then its clear youre not just shirking, you went to some effort. But it has the same effect of pushing the room full of people away from uniformity.
 
posted by improbable
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Reminded me of Bjorn Lomborg - the author of Cool It and The Skeptical Environmentalist among others - making a remark on how hes out of place wearing a T-shirt and jeans in the beginning of his presentation and getting a laugh from the audience:
 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dUJ_H0KSWhM
 
He never seems to wear a suit, even when everyone else wears them.
http://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=bjorn+lomborg
 
Hope more people do this.
 
posted by Stan
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
I dont think of the problem of suit/no-suit, but the problem of replacing something old with something new. If wearing tie-die shirts makes you look hip and popular, everyone else will start to do the same thing. Eventually, wearing suit+tie will make you look old fashioned and out of place.
 
In the end marketing folks and fashionistas know how to drive the fasion industry best every quarter they replace old stuff that they need to get rid of with something newer that people think is more hip, cooler, more in-touch with others.
 
posted by Kevin C
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Its a slow change - but things like the DotCom bubble helped, because all of those new businesses were so desperate to (a) hire coders and (b) look cool that any kind of arbitrary rules went out of the window along with the common sense.
 
I work for a large financial company and ties became non-mandatory for us about two years ago, unless you were talking to a customer.  Give us another 10 years and theyll vanish even then, I suspect.
 
posted by Andrew Ducker
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Suits are already on the way out.  Clothing that signifies power distance isnt.  Even though Steve Jobs doesnt appear in suits, his clothing shows plenty of power distance separating him from inner city kids.
 
posted by Lawrence
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Sometimes getting dressed up is about respect, not about power. A wedding or a funeral come to mind. A way to visibly show people that you thought of them and went through some extra effort to make that show. This is especially true when your role at something is simply to attend.
 
In the Silicon Valley and in SF I might not wear a suit to an interview, but I will wear a nice jacket and slacks.
 
posted by KiltBear
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Suits are a vestige from the days when people used suits (and wigs) to sort out the elite from the common man. Theyve been dying out slowly, but programmers seem to be pushing the envelope the most.  I know I refused to wear as suit to my own wedding. (My wife was fine with kakis and a nice shirt.)
 
Paul Graham has a nice writeup on this:
http://www.paulgraham.com/bubble.html
 
posted by Anonymouse
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Business Casual is one way to skip around the suit issue: smart chinos, smart-ish shirt, dark brown/black trainers/skate shoes.
 
No tie.
 
Basically, dont wear jeans when all others are in full suit: aim for 50% smart.
 
posted by Iain
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Yeah, I think Iain has it. Acceptable dress is an Overton window. You move the window by changing the center, without moving so far away from it as to be dismissed. If everyone is wearing suits, jeans and t-shirt look odd. But jeans and a suit jacket maybe dont. And once everyone is wearing jeans and suit jackets, maybe jeans and t-shirt dont look odd anymore.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
I kind of like wearing a suit but the suit must fit, you must enjoy wearing a suit (I dont wear one all the time) and you gotta learn a bit about to wear one right.  For example, I had always wondered how to tie a good tie knot after much experience now, I can say there is a ton of tacit knowledge involved in tying a good tie knot.  In the end, its just practice.  Working with CS people and lawyers so often, I often feel either overdressed (where hawaiian t-shirts are dressing up) or underdressed (when Im only wearing a blazer over khakis w/ no tie and my lawyer friends are snug as bugs in their suits).
 
Anyway, if you talk to upper management, even suit-required workplaces are starting to see lack of ties and, god forbid, the trend of untucked button-up shirts with a blazer and slacks (not sure where that one comes from).
 
posted by joe
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
To be slightly provoking, untucked button Dow shirts with slacks and jacket is also a really strong fashion influence. Fashion is its own kind of cruel master based in marketing which is based on making people think they need something they really dont. That is another form of powertripping and whole discussion.
 
posted by KiltBear
 on March 17, 2010 #
 
I dont like people who dont like suits. To me, suits can be about dignity, mutual respect, sophistication, and beauty. How they can be about power distance in a setting where everyone wears them is beyond me. If anything, they can be a great equalizer.
 
posted by Puiz
 on March 17, 2010 #
 
You have given the answer yourself. On one hand you feel that suits are a bondage to a particular set of thoughts and on the other you are bothered about what people think. If you gotta take a stance against something, the first thing you need to forget about is people. If you stand for something, you stand for it whole heartedly, otherwise you do not.
 
posted by M
 on March 17, 2010 #
 
As a girl, I have to strongly disagree with your perception: Men look amazing in suits and to this day Ive never met a girl who thinks differently or a man that does not look good in a suit. So aside from all your principles, your distaste for suits might negatively influence your success with girls. In addition, society does make us do a lot of things that are uncomfortable, and dont get me started on the things that women wear (high heels, makeup, skinny jeans) that must be a lot more uncomfortable than suits.
 
However, on a more serious note, I do agree with some of your points. Suits represent business. And I dont understand why you have a problem with that. We wear things for different occasions. Sport gear when we are doing sports, national costumes when we attend embassy gatherings and punk outfits for discos. Why should T-shirts be the norm, more than anything else?
 
Although I very well understand the mentioned principles of elitism and lets call it cultural peer pressure, I disagree with the whole notion,
 
Because I think attire just serves as a means of communication. And isnt that what life is all about? Communication with people. Globalisation, peace, love, all try to achieve that; for people to share the same ideas, and lifestyle, to a certain degree (not that all that is good). Yes, we are diverse and all that, but to truly communicate on another level, you want people to share your opinions (just like the comments you wish to receive on your anti-suit movement post).
 
posted by lindie
 on March 17, 2010 #
 
You can also wear a suit and do some nasty thing to it that will only be seen when looked at it from close distance or in some other ocasion. Like to cut the last bit of it in vertical lines, sew a silly finish from another cloth or even objetcs, put some grey words saying suit or I dont like suits, punch small holes in it.
 
It will give out a strong message but be unnoticed at some distance, so people will be shocked in smaller groups. Certainly you will be a possible subject to open commentary, so it is not for the standard group-shy programmer.
 
Or you can dress up as a waiter, a construction worker, a maid
 
In the 30s adn 40s I read some folks in the US wore very loose zoots or zoot suits, as a way to ridicule suits and change and integrate I guess.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zoot_suit
 
-
 
I also like the wear some kind of nice, taken care of, other type of clothing as mentioned above.
 
And dont agree with the last comment by M. You cannot forget about people when you take a stance, at least I cant. Or maybe you mean you have to forget about people. Well I cant.
 
posted by Pablo Segundo
 on March 17, 2010 #
 
It seems to me (without any real research) one of the main causes of the de-suitification of college campuses in the 60s had to do with the GI bill, and the fact that colleges across the country suddenly became a lot less elite. Then you had people who could afford college coming from families that had no history of suit-wearing. In this case, fashion followed the social change. People didnt decide, en masse, to stop wearing suits to class, its just the people who did wear suits started to become outnumbered by the people that didnt.
 
Going back to film and media about college from the 70s, 80s even 90s, its possible to see archetypes of old money college students still wearing suits, and being vanquished by the blue-collar heroes of the film (Animal House stands out, but I recall even David Spades character in the 1994 rip-off PCU wore suits).
 
What youd need, I think, is not so much to sway the suit-wearing crowd, but to flood the place with a class of participants who dont historically wear suits, people who are demanding that they be taken seriously. Then give it about twenty years.
 
That said, I have to agree with @lindie. Suits themselves are merely an arrangement of cloth, and some of them can look quite nice. They mark the wearer as elite only because theyre relatively expensive and hard to take care of (you cant just throw a suit in the wash). Maybe what we need, instead, is low-cost, nice-looking suits for the masses. That way when theres a mass protest on Capitol Hill, no one will be able to tell the Senators and Lobbyists from the protestors. Wouldnt that be great?
 
posted by Christopher Michel
 on March 17, 2010 #
 
You should move to Southern California.  I have been here for 2 years as an East Coast transplant and it is like everybody banded together and collectively decided that it is acceptable to wear jeans for any occasion.
 
Its all about achieving a general consensus to create a new norm where people look strange if they are wearing a tie and/or suit.  Unfortunately I dont know how you achieve this goal.
 
posted by anthony
 on March 17, 2010 #
 
Until I was 29 I would have agreed with every word in your statement.  Now I simply disagree with your entire notion.
 
It took a legion of men, women and business people, young and old, to change my perspective, and I believe there is merit in saying that your understanding of the purpose of suits is, possibly, empirically incorrect.
 
1) Suits are not worn by people to put themselves on a perch above you - they are worn as equalizers to put people from diverse backgrounds on the same level.  You dont wear a suit to the office or impress, you wear it communicate your sensitivity to the stations (lower and higher) others around you hold, and they do the same for you.  Its not a slash on individualism, but in support of the true professional that says its not about me from 9-5, its about us.
 
2) Suits may cost more than a pair of jeans, but they provide greater value than anything else in your wardrobe.  I can wear my $1000 dollar suit twice a week for the next 5 years and not get a hole, a worn spot, a tattered cuff.  Suits are built with high construction and are meant to be everyday wear that lasts. My $50 jeans cant make the same claim.
 
3) Suits were uncomfortable until, gulp, my two bosses (a man and a women) who both worked in textiles, showed me how to do it.  First, men often force fit themselves into an off the rack item in the same size as their jeans.  Get the suit tailored to your measurements.   Dont wear a belt - it forces the pants down and causes your shirt to bunch.  Instead wear braces - youll breath better and your shirt wont wrinkle.  The other size miscue is the neck of your shirt - men commonly wear shirts that are 1/2 to 1 inches too small - when your neck is cramped, everything hurts! I can tell you the guy who looks bad and uncomfortable in the suit is wearing an ill fitted, uncomfortable suit - thats his fault, not the suits.
 
I was a rock and roller - my pride was being a tshirt and jeans guy.  But Ive grown up and learned that objects only have the meaning you place on them, and they only affect you negatively if you misuse them.
 
posted by Mike Roberts
 on March 18, 2010 #
 
I agree with Mike Roberts in the sense that finely tailored clothes are a good thing. But the uniformity of aesthetics with suits is somewhat offensive to me, and the utility is offset by the fact that they can only be worn formally. Im looking for a style that can be worn on every average day and on every special occasion, lasts pseudo forever, fits perfectly (Ill need a tailor) and is within reach of my paycheck given that Ill only buy a couple in a lifetime.
 
posted by Travis Wellman
 on March 19, 2010 #
 
Theres a lot of interesting stuff about the emergence of consensus in game theory. Look at Robert Axelrods book The Evolution of Cooperation, or check out the Wikipedia article on evolutionarily stable strategy.
 
Mike Roberts, thanks for your response. A lot of food for thought there from somebody who has also been resistant to suits aside from weddings and funerals. Those are also cases of regardless of station, we are all in this together. (I had to look it up; by braces you mean what we Yanks call suspenders. Gotcha, thanks for the tip.)
 
posted by Will Ware
 on April 13, 2010 #
 
I think this whole anti-suit campaign shows that you sir have more prejudice born of intellectual immaturity than you think. Youre trying to further extend your childhood (as though, 4 or 5 years of college wasnt extra enough) and therefore are JUDGING people for what they choose to wear.
 
My father was working class BUT savored putting on suits. Because it was, the great equaliser amongst classes to him. It showed he had class
 
I sincerely doubt you can appreciate that because youre probably living off some government grant anyway, not having really FOUGHT for or WORKED for anything tangible your entire life. My suggestion is that 1)You find a private sector job 2)Learn respect for those about you 3)Buy a suit andProbably get a hair cut too..4)Grow upChildhood is over.
 
posted by Pappy Caligula
 on April 26, 2010 #
 
Sorry to disagree with some of the pro-suit snobs here, but its fine to hate suits. When I see a suit, I think of people like Bernie Madoff. I work in the creative and technological industries, and whenever the suits show up, money starts disappearing. I also have lived in the ghetto/inner city. I have been robbed more times by people wearing suits than people with pants down below their butt. Lawyers, bankers, politicians, virtually everybody in finance, and crooked Christian preachers all wear suits, and they all try their hardest to take my (and your) hard-earned money. When was the last time a suit actually did something to help you? It is the uniform of the oppressor and something that I wish had never been invented.
 
Also, I think ties are the worst accessory ever. A tie, to me, resembles an upside-down noose. I dont like thinks hanging off my neck, especially when they are tight and have a method of access which can pull me down and even injure me by getting stuck in the shredder.
 
posted by Alex Sanders
 on September  5, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March 14, 2010
 
Title: The Reason So Many People Are Unemployed
 
Around the time of the Great Depression, a man named John Maynard Keynes made an incredible discovery. The reason so many people were out of work was not really because of irresponsible banks or high taxes or reckless government policy. It was really much simpler than all that: there wasnt enough money.
 
Now, as individuals, wed all like a little more money for ourselves. But pause for a moment and think about what it means if there isnt enough money in the economy as a whole. A good way to wrap your head around this is to think about a much smaller case: instead of the whole economy, lets think about a now-famous babysitting co-op on Capitol Hill. Instead of dollars, the co-op used its own scrip that was worth an hour of babysitting time. When you wanted to go out, youd pay a couple hours to someone else to watch your kids; then when they wanted to go out, theyd pay you or someone else to do the same for them.
 
It all worked great for a while, until one day they found they had too few pieces of scrip. Every couple had only a couple hours left and, having so little, they didnt want to waste it. So they all decided to save it for a very special occasion. This was kind of an incredible situation  even though there were people who wanted someone to babysit their kids, and people who were willing to do just that, the deal didnt happen, simply because the co-op hadnt printed enough colored pieces of paper. Eventually the co-op learned their mistake, printed some more scrip and handed it out, and everybody went back to babysitting like before and were much happier for it.
 
The same thing happens in the real economy. When there arent enough green-colored pieces of paper around, everybody gets worried and holds on to the little they have. Even if youd like someone to build an extension on your house, and theres someone else out there whod like to build an extension on your house, the deal doesnt happen, just because you dont have enough green pieces of paper (or, more realistically, dollars in your bank account). This is a total waste. You dont get the extension and the other guy doesnt get a job, all because we havent run the printing presses enough (or added enough zeroes to the banks computers).
 
Before the Great Depression, most countries wouldnt simply print more colored pieces of paper. They were on the gold standard and they would only print more currency when more gold was discovered. This led to the most bizarre series of booms and busts as more gold was discovered in strange places and then used up by population growth or other things. After Keynes, countries eventually stopped this silliness and just started printing their money directly. As soon as they abandoned the gold standard, they begun recovering from the Great Depression.
 
But the power to print more money is obviously a very special power and you wouldnt want it to fall into the wrong hands. So, in the United States, weve taken it away from elected politicians and given it (mostly) to the big banks. The banks select people to run their local Federal Reserve and then some of those people (along with some additional folks nominated by the President) are selected to be members of a group called the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The FOMC, essentially, decides how much money there should be in circulation, which in turn decides how many people have jobs.
 
You might think this sounds crazy  a bunch of unelected bankers get to decide how many people have jobs?  and, in fact, it is crazy. But Im not making it up. Ask a macroeconomist, like Paul Krugman, and this is exactly what hell tell you. And if you look in the Federal Reserve Act or on the Feds website, youll find their mission is to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. These multiple goals are relatively recent; before 1978, the goal was simply maximum employment, production, and purchasing power.
 
Now some people will claim that the Federal Reserve has done all it can to create more jobs but the recession is so deep this time that theres nothing else it can do. But thats just not true  even the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke, says its not true. He was asked about this in a Senate hearing. As the Economist summarized his response: Mr Bernanke does not want to risk a de-anchoring of inflation expectations. He is willing to accept 10% or greater unemployment and the resulting economic and political fall-out in order to avoid that risk.
 
Which brings us to the subject of inflation. Obviously if you print a lot of new money, it makes existing money worth a little less. This is annoying, but is it worse than having people out of work? Well, it depends who you are. If you have a lot of money, youre more worried about it becoming worth less. But if you work for a living, youre more worried about people being out of work. As you might expect, Mr. Bernanke has a lot of money, as do the other bankers on the committee and the people who selected them. So theyve decided to let millions and millions of people be unemployed and the rest of us experience the resulting recession rather than risk the chance that some of their money might be worth a little less.
 
The biggest reason this is possible is because nobody realizes it. If it was conventional wisdom that a bunch of unelected bankers looking out for rich people were the reason everyone was out of work, politicians would be forced to explain to angry voters why we had this crazy system and might actually consider doing something about it. But, incredibly, it just seems like nobody has any idea. Voters dont realize it, politicians dont understand it, journalists dont cover it. And, in fact, theyre so far from having any idea that its really difficult to explain it to them. When you say a bunch of unelected bankers are the reason there are no jobs, they just look at you like youre crazy. Ive just spent a page or two explaining it and you still probably think Im crazy. But its true! This isnt some Ron Paul-type crackpot idea; this is mainstream economics, from Paul Krugman to the head of George W. Bushs Council of Economic Advisors.
 
I feel a bit like the guy in one of those movies, going around and telling everyone that the murderer is standing right over there  right there, look!  but nobody believes him and people continue to die. Its incredibly frustrating, and I have no idea what to do about it.
 
One final point: How did we get into this mess in the first place? Why did we suddenly find ourselves without enough money? Well, there was a housing bubble: for many years, house prices kept going up and up for no other reason than everyone was betting that they were just going to keep going up. When house prices were unsustainably high, that was part of the money in circulation. But when the music stopped and the bubble popped, house prices cratered and nearly $8 trillion disappeared overnight. The government has printed a bunch of money since then, but nowhere near the $8 trillion we lost. Obviously a lot of other bad stuff happened during the financial crisis, but this is the reason everybody is out of work.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 14, 2010
 
Aaron
 
You have a lot of valid points, I do agree with 90% of them ;)
What you are describing are the inflation reasons, but there is more to the current economy situation, and running out of greens is just a result of more deep issues and ongoing crime.
Let me give you some of the reasons:
1) Few banks like Golden Sachs and AIG played poker with huge amount of cash, those amount are of significant %% (~10%) of the total dollar cash  mass
2) At the same time the market that holds the whole US economy, the real estate market, collapses on unpaid mortgages - its not a secret that US economy is real estate market bound (not technology or goods import/export) and recent bubble proved it
3) Golden Sachs is constantly borrowing money from governemt via non-fee bailout cash and rents that cash back to Feds via government bonds, skimming the APR, thus Feds are running out of cash because GS is accumulating extra cash without returning it to the market - they cannot stop GS because there is nothing illegal with that arbitrage, its more of the moral issue; thats why Obama is desperately trying to push special provisions thru the Senate to stop such abuse, but   Senate is so corrupted, they fight it back
4) Feds start to print money to keep positive cash flow which creates the situation you describe
5) Golden Sach makes $404b out of taxpayers pockets in 2 years by skimming the Feds - you and me payed bonuses to those jerks out of our and our children pockets
 
Thats my point
 
posted by Tau
 on March 14, 2010 #
 
The babysitting coop you are describing sounds like a zero-sum economy, but is it really?  What is to stop the price from going down, so that some folks would be willing to accept a fraction of a scrip? What is to stop new couples from joining the coop, driving up the supply of babysitters, and therefore driving down the cost?  If everyone is so low on scrip, that implies that a small group is hoarding it.  What is to stop some of the babysitters from increasing the quality of their service until the hoarders are finally tempted to spend their scrip back into circulation?
 
And back to the real economy, what is to stop all of these unemployed people from learning new skills, moving to other markets, or working for lower wages?  Why should savers be punished because the unemployed are unwilling to make sacrifices?
 
posted by Joe Hewitt
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
Tau: Those are all bad things but theyre not really related to my question, which is, Why are people unemployed?
 
Joe: For the full answer, you should read my post on Keynes:
 
http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/keynes
 
I can go into the details of the babysitting coop if you want, but I dont think its particularly informative about the more general case. In the real economy, imagine the unemployed work for less measured in dollars (a lower nominal wage). Then their employers reduce the price of the products those workers make, since labor is a large component of the costs (a lower nominal price). But that means that the new lower wage workers receive is actually worth about the same in terms of what it can purchase (same real wage). So were right back where we started!
 
I dont see how learning new skills or moving to other markets is supposed to help in this situation.
 
Savers should be punished because saving is bad for the economy.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
Great Post!
 
You are totally on to it.
 
Its helpful to look at civilizations as products of social energy countless decisions by individuals and groups. (A decision is an idea + an action).
 
Money and credit are very imperfect technologies for the storage and allocation of this social energy with an inherent bias in favor of any with the power to create it.
 
So, since this creator bias is inevitable the solution has to lie in democratizing (with important checks and balances) the process. This inherent bias also makes the Feds claim of independence ridiculous on its face and is a core problem with the monopoly of central banking. (This doesnt suggest its elimination, only elimination of its monopoly).
 
After all who has the right to create and than allocate YOUR social energy without your input?
 
Thats worse than taxation without representation thats potentially multi-generational enslavement without having an ounce of input into that allocation of your lifes energy.
 
The thought process that rationalizes it for the credit creator and those most closely benefitting is tied to a problem of scaling biological altruism but thats a separate essay.
 
I believe this inherent bias may suggest that more than one type of credit creation may be desirable. For example local currencies geared to local products and services to function alongside one or more global currencies in an attempt to overcome a proximity bias which goes along with a social bias.
 
This approach can encourage asset-based-community-development and economic and financial resiliency while preserving the advantages of global trade and markets as well.
 
Again, Im not an economist but it seems to me these are ideas worth investigating.
 
A brief post on some of this here:
 
On Social Energy, Enterprise & Expanding the Technology of Money
http://culturalengineer.blogspot.com/2010/01/on-social-energy-enterprise-expanding.html
 
I also believe the Individually-controlled / Commons-dedicated Account facilitating the microtransaction in Commons focussed activities (politics and charity) is an essential piece of this puzzle.
 
Opinion and influence are also aspects of social energy which money powerfully conveys(though we might wish it werent so). Current money technology inhibits the free flow and networking of this energy which distorts opinion markets.
 
And, in fact, tends to further entrench the problem.
 
posted by Tom Crowl
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
Um, this is a little oversimplified i think ;). For example, Obviously a lot of other bad stuff happened during the financial crisis, but this is the reason everybody is out of work. Everybodys out of work? ;)
 
posted by Adrian Scott
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
I dont think the Feds choice can be described as simply as theyve decided to let millions and millions of people be unemployed and the rest of us experience the resulting recession rather than risk the chance that some of their money might be worth a little less.
 
The truth is that increased inflation means that everyone has a bit less - not just the big bankers, but everyone saving up for a car, or a house, or a wedding. It means that everyones wage goes a little less; hopefully it still covers food, but it covers less of their discretionary spending desires. Bankers and people with wealth keep ahead of inflation. regular people have a much harder time.
 
Fluctuations in inflation cause so much uncertainty at home and in business that it leads to less spending overall. Bernake thinks that reducing that risk will lead to a stronger and more sustainable recovery than simply pumping money into the economy.
 
posted by Aaron
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
Thank you, this is definitely an important part of the story, and it is crazy that it is not recognized- but theres a reason for that, and it has to do with the part of dynamic that you dont pursue. Inflation is really bad for people who have a lot of money, and that matters a great deal. Organizations at the core of the financial system are engaged in an active, dynamic, complicated trust relationship around the flow of very large quantities of money over specific periods of time.
 
Large organizations dont actually have little pieces of green paper sitting around- instead they utilize a web of promises to exchange various quantities of green paper with each other on various timeframes and at various costs.
 
Now, the other bad thing that happened a couple of years ago was the near-collapse of these trust relationships, in part related to the housing crisis but still largely independent of it. The failure of Lehman and the breaking of the buck nearly led, on several occasions, to the web of trust underlying the financial system from failing altogether. If that had happened, we would be talking about 50% unemployment and martial law, rather than 10% unemployment.
 
Whats happening now is that well-intentioned money managers are still rebuilding trust. The problem that raising inflation creates in a climate where trust is not guaranteed is one of complexity, of too many things changing at a time. If money manager attention has to focus on minimizing inflation losses, then were still facing a near term risk of a frozen financial system.
 
This dynamic is the really important one, from a progressive governance perspective, to work on explaining and fixing.
 
posted by jrb
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
So are you actually advocating increasing the money supply as the solution to our current economic problems?  If so, by how much?  And how should it be distributed?
 
Im not sure Im convinced that your babysitting co-op example mirrors our actual economic situation.  It may be fine to say that some unemployment can be caused by a lack of money, but it doesnt necessarily follow that all unemployment can be traced back to that same cause.
 
In the current environment, its hard not to put at least some of the blame on automation, outsourcing, and overall improvements in efficiency that allow fewer people to do more work.  If a factory can get the same levels of output without hiring as many line workers, it wont hire the line workers, wont hire the managers of those line workers, and wont staff the hr department that would have dealt with all the people its not hiring elsewhere, etc.  Yes, some of those lost jobs are offset by the upstream companies that supply the automation tools, but those upstream companies are improving their own efficiencies at the same time.  And its not only manufacturing thats seeing these kinds of changes: the internet is allowing all kinds of work be distributed more efficiently, as well (ask local papers how Craigslist has helped them).
 
People knocked out of these kinds of jobs dont necessarily have the skills that are currently in demand.  It takes time and effort to figure out what those in-demand skills actually are, to retrain so that you have them, and to go out and get a job.  During that time, they dont spend, because they dont have the money to.
 
There were plenty of people who benefited greatly from these increased efficiencies, and many of them still have plenty of money.  Are they spending?  Some of this goes back to your babysitting coop example, that they arent because they want to hold on to what they perceive as an increasingly rare thing.  But thats not the whole story.  There are two kinds of spending: the kind you want to do (trips to Spain, gold watches, etc.), and the kind you dont (the dentist, taxes).  Where do you think employees you dont really need falls?  And its not like you need to be a greedy bastard to make this decision (how many people does Craigslist employ?).
 
If youre increasing the money supply, are you handing it over to the people who already have money, in hopes theyll go on a hiring spree?  If so, why are you convinced that they actually will?  Are you handing it out directly to the people who dont have jobs?  If so, how do you know that will translate into a sustainable solution, where theyll end up with jobs on the other side?
 
Increasing the money supply isnt without danger.  If youre wrong, and you add too much, money loses its value, and prices go up.  This hurts the poor and people with cash savings far more than it hurts the wealthy, who dont care how much a gallon of milk costs and regularly convert cash to other holdings anyways.  It also directly rewards people who have racked up debt (and while this might help some good people, dont forget that debt is also a favored tool of the same wealthy bankers youre calling out in your post).  Too much inflation is bad, and its incorrect to assume that its only the wealthy who suffer the ill effects of it.
 
posted by Jason Fager
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
While Joe Hewitt hit on most of the topics I was concerned about, I just wanted to add some other ones:
 1. There is no fractional scrip, no way to accept .5 hours for an hour (or more) of babysitting. This makes it difficult to deflate.
 2. This is not really a closed economy; people can just hire a regular babysitter. This may all have been caused by people with saved scrip EXITING the economy and using $$$ paid babysitters outside of the system. Note: gradual inflation DOES effectively reduce the impact of disappearing hoarders, but that is a paper by Greenspan, not necessarily Keynes.
 3. Not long after the end of your quoted graph, everybody effectively returned to a gold standard, or something meant to emulate it, via the Bretton Woods agreement -> http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bretton_Woods_system , And correlation doesnt mean causation. If the gold standard was so bad, why did it work for the USA (with a fixed $35/oz price of gold) for 30 years after the end of the depression? Only the expenses of the Vietnam war pushed the USA into sufficient deficit spending that they needed to hit the printing presses, and a brief examination of the 70s near hyperinflation shows a compelling counter-example of the utility of the gold standard.
 
posted by Derek Anderson
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
Its incredibly frustrating, and I have no idea what to do about it.
 
The uninformed people I know like to occasionally forward html emails around to eachother. Usually, these emails involve humor, or holiday greetings, but sometimes they stretch a little and try to inform.
 
If you want to do something, I suggest you continue writing informative blog posts like this one, but also create some compelling and informative graphics that could be easily forwarded around. I can barely get my friends/relatives to click a link, let alone actually read something. But if I send them a graphic in an email, along with a short blurb, theyll look at it and read the blurb before deleting.
 
I think that stands a chance it at least making a dent in ignorance.
 
posted by John
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
I believe some of the money that was in the economy wasnt actually there.  You talk about increasing the flow of currency in the economic system, and you mention the housing investment bubble, but I believe thats apples and oranges.  The bubble happened when housing investments were valued higher than their worth, and the crash happened when they were valued at their actual worth again (or less).  The notion that these investments could be sold for more than they were worth was an illusion that there was more money in the system, just solidified in these properties and portfolios.
 
The only money that went missing in the crash of 2008 was the value of junk bonds/loans/portfolios  money that wasnt in the economy before the bubble anyways.  A more interesting question is: Where was the REAL money circulating when this potential-but-not-real money kept changing hands as the investment bubble inflated?
 
posted by Moses
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
What substantiative actions are being taken by the reserve? To me it appears they are gunning for inflation with the low rates.
 
If I have $billions then I can invest my money in a way that hedges against inflation. Conversely if I make $20k/year I cant insist that my employer pay me in long oil positions. So its not true that inflation always hurts the bourgeoisie and helps the proletariat.
 
It is true that inflation hurts a lender and helps a debtor. If inflation is at 10% and your mortgage at 6% then youre effectively making a 4% return on debt. Conversely the bank is losing money because the money repaid is worth so much less than the money lent. Bonus points for anyone that figures out why the banks arent lending
 
As for Bernanke/cronies motivations; the federal government would like inflation to be as high as possible without risking collapse. So if money for their masters was the Feds goal they will keep gunning for sustainable inflation. Bernanke/cronies can hedge against it, and the largest debtor in the world would prefer to pay a low interest rate.
 
posted by Galt
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
Bankers are Americas Nazis.  Like the Nazis, they believe their own self-righteous rhetoric that results in catastrophic loss of life and property.  Also, bankers take a hard-line, fundamentalist view of Darwinism (when it suits them) and believe they are doing Gods work.
 
Im being overly dogmatic here, but its not so far-fetched.  All of the Nazi propagandists went to work in America after the war.  Its no surprise that the corporate media landscape in postwar America turned out to be very similar to what Hitler inflicted on the Germans to get them to buy into the system.
 
The problem is so big, and the citizenry are so propagandized, out-of-shape, and unable to cope with the current realities that Im not sure what can be done.  Maybe we should just all accept that were going to live this quasi-serf-like existence for the next few generations.
 
As far as I can tell, America is the next Argentina at this point.  The Democrat-Republicans are content with using currency inflation to benefit only the speculators and politico class at this point.
 
The educated class in America feel that they have to repeat the approved slogans so they too might become part of the aristocracy.  We live our lives as if it were a television advertisement of our self-importance so that we might be able to give a TED talk one day.
 
The working class seem content with distracting themselves by overeating toxic food-like substances from BigAgra and watching mindless celebrity-drivel to be concerned with anything that would enable their long-term happiness or survival.
 
Going back to subsistence typing now unless youve got a better idea on what we should do.
 
posted by Roger Babson
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
Ron Pauls ideas on economics arent strictly his ideas, but those of Friedrich von Hayek, to which Paul so often credits. Hayek won the Nobel Prize in 1974 and according to Wikipedia is considered by some to be one of the most important economists and political philosophers of the twentieth century. While Wikipedia and the Nobel committee arent necessarily the final word on the subject, or anything else for that matter, describing Hayeks ideas as crackpot, is not only ad hominem, but uninformed. Youd be well served reading Hayeks The Road to Serfdom before falling too in love with Keynes and his ideas.
 
posted by Jason Roberts
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
One of the reasons why the Federal Reserves principal missions is to fight inflation is that the American economy was so badly managed during the 1970s. Prices skyrocketed, in part because dollars were being printed to pay for the Vietnam war and other social programs introduced in the late 1960s.
 
While classical economics states that inflation is the debtors friend, inflation has a detrimental effect on everybody (unless you have a negative net worth). One can argue that inflation disproportionately affects the lower middle class and the elderly. A millionaire can easily absorb losing 10% of his net worth to inflation; a poor person, not so much. This is why the economic choices made in the 70s resulted in a protracted period of political upheaval.
 
If the current tight money supply were to be translated into voter anger against sitting politicians, as it did in the Nixon/Ford/Carter era, the Fed would change its priorities. But since the Fed governors and chairmen are appointed, it would take years for this to happen.
 
Id just read that the Dodd banking reform bill proposes to have Fed governors appointed by the President instead of nominated by member banks. That makes a lot of sense to me.
 
posted by Jeffrey
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Cash handouts to the public by the Australian government during the crisis have been seen as one of the reasons we stayed out of recession. Couldnt your government perform similar actions to circumvent the collusion by the Federal Reserve and the big banks? If that is true, and has not been done, then the government is just as much to blame as the rest of the system.
 
posted by Mal
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Perhaps Hayeks other books are better, but The Road to Serfdom is the definition of crackpot, at least judging from the comic book.
 
Yes, Congress bears ultimate responsibility for the jobs crisis.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Hi Aaron, your theory makes a lot of sense to me, but Im having trouble grasping the final part (about how we got into this mess).
 
I live in the UK where, by all accounts, the recession hasnt caused unemployment to the same levels it has in the states (at least, not yet), but everyones saying its still a massive problem, and to be sure, a lot of people are losing their jobs.
 
However, property prices, which were higher than prices in the US before the recession, have not really taken much of a hit. Maybe a little, but they are still unsustainably high (Im 24, I earn relatively very well, and I have no real prospect of affording the deposit on a mortgage in the near future).
 
So why are we in just as much trouble as you guys? I appreciate our economy is reliant on yours to a larger degree than is probably healthy, but what exactly is the reason that the rest of the world is in recession because of a US property crash?
 
posted by Mark
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Why slam Ron Paul?  His followers might have crackpot ideas, but not the man himself.
 
He is the ONLY politician from the last presidential campaign that specifically called out the Federal Reserve.  And hes doing something about it now in Congress:
 
http://www.ronpaul.com/on-the-issues/audit-the-federal-reserve-hr-1207/
 
Now, you might say that this is the opposite position.  You want the Federal Reserve to print more money.  While Ron Paul thinks it has printed too much money and caused inflation.
 
But the positions have in common that the actions of the Federal Reserve should be transparent and accessible to the public, not locked up in private discussions.  Only then can there be legitimate debate about monetary policy.
 
Is the argument that there are literally not enough 0s in peoples bank accounts (a psychological expectation), or that this number of 0s does not buy enough stuff?  If the latter, then its related to inflation, so if there were more inflation, then people would be inclined to save even more.
 
Its not as clear an argument as you present it.  The economy is complex.  Every recession is different from the others.
 
posted by Andy
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
I went to Capitol Hill and worked hard to get Rep. Pauls audit the fed amendment passed in the House  and we succeeded, it passed the full House for the first time since he started pushing for it decades ago despite incredibly intense opposition from the Fed and House leaders.
 
But yes, Rep. Paul and I have opposite ideas about what the Fed should do. Saving is the problem. If there was more inflation, people would save less because the money they saved would be worth less in the future.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
Wow great that you actually put some work into getting it passed!
 
But then why slam Ron Paul by associating him with crackpot ideas?  He has been the lawmaker whose concrete actions would lead to increasing awareness of the problem you are so frustrated by!
 
The disagreement is an honest one.  And there is no doubt that Ron Paul has been fighting this fight for decades, honestly, without a lot of political gain, as you point out.
 
So please cut him some slack and dont insult him carelessly.  I think you are probably being overly sensitive to fellow liberals who feel libertarians are naive, and are trying to distance yourself from that group.  These simplifying labels dont help.
 
Also, I am curious to hear your opinion on whether its literally the number of 0s or whether its buying power that causes people to save (Im sure a mix of both).
 
Im not really convinced by your argument.  So its hardly fair for you to feel that everyone else is just ignorant of the issue you raise.  They might just disagree with you.
 
posted by Andy
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
For people looking for more sources, Naked Capitalism has a guest post today about unusually massive amounts of excess reserves that the Fed is holding on to, and theres a lot of analysis too. Concurs on the facts and most of the analysis in your article, Aaron, as far as I can see:
 
http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2010/03/guest-post-m1-money-multiplier-still-crashing-each-1-increase-in-monetary-base-results-in-only-79-cent-increase-in-money-supply.html
 
posted by Marcus
 on March 17, 2010 #
 
Aaron said, Savers should be punished because saving is bad for the economy.
 
Its thinking like this that got us into the mess to begin with.  Fueling asset purchases with massive debt left us with overvalued assets, debts that cannot be serviced, insolvent banks, and trillions in transfers from workers to Wall Street.
 
If I choose to work more today and save the surplus so I can work less when Im 70, thats called being responsible.  If you punish responsibility by inflating away the value of individuals savings, youll get less of it.
 
posted by mb
 on March 17, 2010 #
 
Savers should be punished because saving is bad for the economy.
 
Saving allows you to wait until there is an opportunity to spend your money on something that you actually want.  The alternative is waste.  Imagine the degenerate case where all of the wealth that you create is destroyed unless you immediately trade it for something else.  Insanity.
 
posted by Rich Collions
 on March 17, 2010 #
 
Seems like Chinas population saves a high percentage of their income without hurting their economy.  Maybe they should be punished for not living beyond their means.
 
posted by mb
 on March 19, 2010 #
 
Im sorry Aaron, but your idea that saving is bad for the economy is so unbelievably dumb that it takes a lot away from some of your other points (note that Im saying the idea is dumb, not you, so this is not ad hominem.) I certainly agree that the Federal Reserve and its associated rich bankers are a bunch of slime balls. But to say that we need more inflation to solve our problems is just silly (inflation by definition is more money in a closed system.) As others have said in previous comments, inflation mainly hurts the poor and middle class.
 
Now, lets talk more about saving. If people do not save, then there is no CAPITAL which can be used by businesses to create things and otherwise improve the economy. If you just create money out of thin air, it has no value. Money is supposed to represent stored labor, which is why it is so evil when the bankers just inflate it at their whim.
 
As others have said, if saving is so bad for an economy, why does China basically own the US at this point? The Chinese are diligent savers, and as a result China has bought trillions in US Treasury Bonds. In fact if China did not buy our bonds the US government would collapse overnight. This is because the US government is so gigantic and money hungry that it cannot tax we citizens enough to survive. It depends on loans from people outside the country buying bonds.
 
Lastly, your babysitting example is so cherry-picked to prove your point that is it useless as a general example. I can use the same example to prove the harm of inflation: if some people in the coop started counte-fitting the scrips (aka inflating them), they would be able to get more baby-sitting than they should. In addition the extra scrips then circulating would reduce the value of each scrip, and therefore hurt the people who were saving some for when they needed them.
 
By the way I assume you live hand to mouth since you so abhor saving. I hope you dont ever lose your job then because if you do you will be screwed. Or more likely the rest of us will have to support you. If you feel that is fair then Im not sure what to tell you.
 
posted by Ryan
 on March 19, 2010 #
 
Its called a proletariat, a word ironically out of use since the proportion of the populance falling into that category has only grown and grown since the romans coined it. Theres really nothing useful for most people to do.
 
posted by Huzzah
 on March 20, 2010 #
 
This post is an amazingly lucid explanation of things Ive seen obfuscated many other places. The whole argument is very clear and very well laid out.
 
I wasnt familiar with the babysitting coop, had to read the Wikipedia entry. Dumb question here: would the fluctuations in scrip value and the hoarding have been less of a problem if providers could announce how much babysitting they were willing to do, effectively issuing scrip themselves? Since scrip will always ultimately be redeemed by providers, should they be the issuing authority?
 
The idea that saving is bad: I think youve made a compelling point that taking currency out of circulation is bad. But if I save it in a bank, and they then use it for business and personal loans, it continues to circulate. Have I missed something here?
 
posted by Will Ware
 on April 13, 2010 #
 
So theres a second point here that I didnt go into. The idea that money saved in a bank gets loaned out again is actually a kind of myth. In practice, a bank makes loans whether or not they have the money  theyre licensed to create new money by the Federal Reserve whenever they see an investment opportunity. (This is very surprising to people, but it turns out to be true.) Thus putting your money in the bank effectively takes it out of circulation as much as putting it under your bed does.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 13, 2010 #
 
Think of it this way.  The 1930s in the U.S. were marked by Deflation.  And the 1970s in the U.S. were marked by Inflation.  The gold standard is a complete distraction from the issue.
 
Ive written about this extensively, so ill add a few other components to the political mess.  For starters, and I write this on my bloga great deal of the Ron Paul stuff comes from the guy giving him economic advice in his 08 campaign:  Peter Schiff.  Schiff is currently running for Senate as a long shot in Connecticut.  He is also the one who began beating the inflation drum like were in the 70s.  I think this is completely wrong.  I tend to side with the Deflationary minority on this particular issuethough I am on the small d democratic end of the spectrum politically and in terms of what I think of other people (i.e. I believe in the citizenryunlike the opposition who wants to subordinate them to business hierarchy).
 
But here is the thing. The Fed doesnt really print the money.  They have a complex way of controlling lending.  But it all revolves around the banking system.  The best general way to understand it is to know the post 70s story with the fed.
 
Until 1979 (pre Reagan) the fed had to answer to congress much more.  If the fed wanted to raise rates (reduce investment capital coming in the downward direction from the top of society towards the working class), it had to clear it with the congress.  What happened was that in the 70s, you had this inflationary problem, and no house rep wanted to be the person to pull the trigger and raise rates and thus kill jobs in their districts.  To get around this, by the late 70s, the new right had pretty much consolidated power (During the Carter administration) and there was an agreement to extend power of the fed so that it could be independent of politics.  This would mean that it could raise rates to rates high enough to slow the economy down, and bring down the inflation.  There are so many layers to this story, but thats the quickest I can type it out.
 
But just understand, that entire thing is ideological.  It is built around the following assumptions:
 
1 the economy must revolve primarily around private investment.
 
Reality:  the economy does not know the difference between public sector spending and private sector spending.  The merits of each should be discussedbut the economy does not have a preference.  At the end of the day its a social decision as to which outcomes we prefer not a political determination sent down from the heavens.
 
Point 2:  Since point 1 is held as gospel, then we must do all we can to ensure that the aristocracy on top is feeling like investing.  If we create a climate where they dont want to investthen we must all suffer.  Thats the rule, as it is laid out in rule 1.
 
Reality:  We COULD simply stimulate from the middle, creating state jobs, state money to super small business, food subsidies paid for by progressive taxation, direct competition for employment (forces the private sector to bid higher for workers), etc..
 
point 3.  The techniques we must rely on for investor class happiness are tax cuts or low taxes for the investors (so theyll invest of course) and the feds focus on inflation.
 
But as of right now, just survey the situation.  The fed has ultra low rates..yet you still have no inflation anywhere in sight.  They are pulling out all of the stops to maintain the investors aristocracy, but it isnt working.  The S&P is up 70% or so from the 2009 lows, but look at the rest of the economy.
 
In my estimation, it doesnt matter what they do to encourage the investor elite to invest their capital.  The problem in the economy is not in the abstract.  The problem is WHICH PEOPLE are negatively effected.  Poor people are excellent for investment (they are willing to work more for less, giving up more in life, for less in return.  They are reducers of standards).  This is why the economy will not be fixed by monetary policy or investor oriented fixes.  You cant fix that area because it isnt the part thats fucked up.
 
posted by Evan
 on April 29, 2010 #
 
posted by K.
 on July  6, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March 14, 2010
 
Title: Theory of Change
 
I am increasingly convinced that the difference between effective and ineffective people is their skill at developing a theory of change. Theory of change is a funny phrase  I first heard it in the nonprofit community, but its also widespread in politics and really applies to just about everything. Unfortunately, very few people seem to be very good at it.
 
Lets take a concrete example. Imagine you want to decrease the size of the defense budget. The typical way you might approach this is to look around at the things you know how to do and do them on the issue of decreasing the defense budget. So, if you have a blog, you might write a blog post about why the defense budget should be decreased and tell your friends about it on Facebook and Twitter. If youre a professional writer, you might write a book on the subject. If youre an academic, you might publish some papers. Lets call this strategy a theory of action: you work forwards from what you know how to do to try to find things you can do that will accomplish your goal.
 
A theory of change is the opposite of a theory of action  it works backwards from the goal, in concrete steps, to figure out what you can do to achieve it. To develop a theory of change, you need to start at the end and repeatedly ask yourself, Concretely, how does one achieve that? A decrease in the defense budget: how does one achieve that? Yes, you.
 
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Congress passes a new budget with a smaller authorization for defense next year.
 
Yes, thats true  but lets get more concrete. How does that happen?
 
AUDIENCE: Uh, you get a majority of the House and Senate to vote for it and the President to sign it.
 
Great, great  so how do you get them to do that? Now we have to think about what motivates politicians to support something. This is a really tricky question, but its totally crucial if we want to be effective. After all, if we dont eventually motivate the politicians, then what weve done is useless for achieving our goal. (Unless we can think of some other way to shrink the defense budget.)
 
But this is also not an insoluble problem. Put yourself in the shoes of a politician for a moment. What would motivate you? Well, on the one hand, theres what you think is right. Then theres what will help you get reelected. And finally theres peer pressure and other sort of psychological motivations that get people to do things that dont meet their own goals.
 
So the first would suggest a strategy of persuading politicians that cutting the defense budget was a good idea. The second would suggest organizing a constituency in their districts that would demand they cut the defense budget. And maybe one of you can figure out how to use the thirdthats a little trickier.
 
But lets stick with the first, since thats the most standard. What convinces politicians that something is the right thing to do?
 
AUDIENCE: Their beliefs?
 
In a sense, I suppose. But those are going to be pretty hard to change. Im thinking more, if you have a politician with a given set of beliefs, how do you convince them that cutting the defense budget advances those beliefs?
 
AUDIENCE: You outline why to them.
 
Well, OK, lets think about that. Do you think if you ran into Nancy Pelosi in the hallway here and you tried to explain to her why cutting the defense budget would accomplish her beliefs, that youd convince her?
 
AUDIENCE: Probably not.
 
Why not?
 
AUDIENCE: Because she wouldnt really listen to me  shed just smile and nod.
 
Yeah. Nancy Pelosi doesnt trust you. Shes never met you. Youre not particularly credible. So you need to find people the politicians trust and get them to convince the politicians.
 
Alright, well, we can continue down this road for a while  figuring out who politicians trust, figuring out how to persuade them, figuring out how to get them to, in turn, persuade the politicians, etc. Then, when the politicians are persuaded, theres the task of developing something they can vote for, getting it introduced so they can vote on it, then getting them to vote on the specific measure even when they agree with the overall idea. You can see that this can take quite a while.
 
Its not easy. It could take a while before you get to a concrete action that you can take. But do you see how this is entirely crucial if you want to be effective? Now maybe if youre only writing a blog post, its not worth it. Not everything we do has to be maximally effective. But DC is filled with organizations that spend millions of dollars each year and have hardly even begun to think about these questions. Im not saying their money is totally wasted  it certainly has some positive impacts  but it could do so much more if the people in charge thought, concretely, about how it was supposed to accomplish their goals.
 
Ill close with one more example, showing how this strategy can be used personally as well. I was at a party once and I told someone I was writing a book and that I wanted it to be a bestseller. They laughed at that and I think its because they had a theory of action model in their head: you write the best book you can, and of course you want it to be a bestseller, but either it does or it doesnt.
 
But I was working backwards, I had a theory of change: I asked, What makes something a best seller? Well, lots of people buy it. OK, how do you get lots of people to buy something? Well, you have to persuade them its something they want. OK, how do you persuade them its something they want? Well, first it has to meet some desire or need they have and second you need to explain to them how it meets that need. So what are the desires or needs people have? (Looking at bestsellers: entertainment, escape, self-improvement, etc.) What are the ways of explaining your book meets their need? (Being popular early on, appearances in the media, persuading readers to tell other readers, etc.)
 
Again, we can keep going for quite a while until we get all the way back to something I can actually do. But because of this, I didnt have to simply have to hope that my book became a bestseller, like every other author. I could actually do something about it.
 
Thats the power of a theory of change.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 14, 2010
 
Excellent Entry Aaron.  Goldratt wrote a good book called Its Not Luck which introduces a number of Thinking Processes.  The process you describe above is one of them.  Goldratts book is in the form of a fable, but another author Lisa J. Sheinkopf wrote a book called Thinking for a Change which enumerates the processes steps more clearly.  Thought these might be helpful references as well.  The name Theory of Change though is quite a bit more catchy than their terms. :)
 
Thanks for taking the time to pen your thoughts.
 
posted by Matthew Michels
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
If you write I was writing a book and () wanted it to be a bestseller + Looking at bestsellers: entertainment, a reasonable conclusion would be that you were writing a book which was, before all, entertaining.
Building Progammable Web Sites ? hard to believe that its first quality would be entertainmenticity
So, another opus on fire ?
 
posted by Bertrand
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
I was going to ask if there were any books or other materials that you would recommend if I wanted to learn more, and it seems Matthew has already supplied some of that information. Googling Thinking for a change throws up two distinct titles, so Im glad we have an author for one of them.
 
Is there anything you would recommend, Aaron?
 
posted by JeremyCherfas
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
I have not found most books on this subject to be particularly helpful.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
This post was quite reassuring, albeit for perverse reasons. I work in the nonprofit world and use the theory of change concept in much that I think and do. It has lead me to a new field of practice that no one has  successfully implemented, because I think it is the missing piece in the change process. I HATE to be bad at what I do, but trying and failing and learning at the missing piece is better than doing the same-old-thing that doesnt work. Or at least I hope it is. I realize you are using theory of change to identify the components of success, while I am using it to identify the point of failure, but the post was still reassuring.
 
posted by Warren Yoder
 on March 15, 2010 #
 
aaron  thanks for an interesting viewpoint. very gladwell-esque, except with an implicit call to action. is it relatively safe to say your theory can be distilled to earning trust in order to persuade/convince/influence others? trust is one of those fuzzy areas that is often abused by, for example, car salesmen and mortgage brokers. their talent in earning your trust speaks to the one-way street that trust entails. we put our trust into those who we WANT to trust, not necessarily into those who want to earn our trust. so while the writer or activist wants to inspire change and needs to gain credibility by earning trust, it is more the perception of trust (a la salesmen) that may most likely net them the change they are aiming for.
 
i like it, either way. 
thanks.
 
~jenn
@revolucion0
 
posted by Jenn Topper
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
I was at a party once and I told someone I was writing a book and that I wanted it to be a bestseller. They laughed at that and I think its because they had a theory of action model in their head: you write the best book you can, and of course you want it to be a bestseller, but either it does or it doesnt.
 
Well, I wasnt there, but a possible other reason is that the number of people who want their books to be bestsellers, far exceeds, almost by definition, the number of possible bestsellers. So its a bit like hearing someone say I want to win the lottery (yes, of course you do, you and all the other players).
 
Again, we can keep going for quite a while until we get all the way back to something I can actually do.
 
Can you (do)? That it the core of the matter. Its quite an art to write a bestseller-potential book. Then theres the promotion if it, which if nothing else, TAKES TIME (and usually money).
 
Basically, youre neglecting the possibility of getting all the way to back to finding you cant do it. Or, more accurately, to outcomes like nobody knows how to do it or its very high risk to try to do it.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on March 16, 2010 #
 
@Seth: The difference between the lottery and writing a best selling book is complexity. Short of criminal means, there is literally only one step involved in lottery: getting a ticket. The only variance here, obviously, is the amount of tickets you get. Writing a bestseller on the other hand affords you an unlimited amount of choices in every step along the way.
 
It is a pity then, that disregarding all the choices involved most would-be writers opt to focus on rather unimportant things that generally cost time without improving their chances instead of learning the craft or researching the market. When they finally think about how to publish, they are easy bait for scam artists that pose as publishers but charge them a nominal fee to print their book.
 
Going by the theory of change, you pass the most difficult (well, sort of; once you arrive there, these goals arent necessarily any more difficult than anything else youve done to get there) or distant goals first. This way, you can stay on track, always evaluating your actions and whether they bring you closer to acheiving your end goal. I really really like the thinking involved here and I shall apply the backward strategy to improve my decision-making. It really is time to stop looking for nails to hammer in when what you really need is a different tool.
 
Thank you, Aaron.
 
posted by Berthold Barth
 on April 20, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March  8, 2010
 
Title: Philosophical Puzzles Resolved
 
Daniel Wikler posed to me the following problem he encountered while Staff Ethicist at the WHO.1 The WHO recommends two principles: first, treat all citizens equally; second, aim to maximize overall quality of life. But imagine two citizens will die without a kidney transplant, one of whom is seriously disabled, but there is only one kidney. The first principle requires that both have an equal chance of getting the kidney. But the second principle requires we give it to the non-disabled person: if the disabled person dies, overall quality of life in the society will be higher, since it will have one less disabled person. (We accept, by definition, that disability lowers quality of life.) What to do?
 
Response: It seems pretty clear that the first value is simply wrong. We have no interest in promoting the health of the population; the population is simply an abstraction. Our interest is in promoting the health of (the sum of) individual people, who are conscious and therefore have moral interests.
 
One can see this clearly by looking at the cases where the population changes but people do not: birth, death, exile, and immigration:
 
Birth: The society has a controlled population growth program and assigns birth permits; birth permits are assigned to parents with the healthiest genes.
 
Death: The society has a limited number of organs; organs are given to the least-injured.
 
Exile: Sick people are tossed out of the society.
 
Immigration: Only healthy people are allowed to immigrate.
 
In all four such cases, it seems pretty clear to me that the population health position is wrong. (Exile seems particularly cruel.)
 
Derek Parfit poses the following problem. 1: Imagine there are a group of happy people (A). 2: Now imagine that some other people are created in some other completely unconnected place that are happy, but less happy than the previous group (B). 3: Now imagine that both groups are adjusted to be at some equal, but intermediate point of happiness between A and A+. 4: Now imagine these two societies are connected, resulting in C: more people at a lesser degree of happiness.
 
2 is no worse than 1, since the additional people are happy and do not affect anyone. 3 is no worse than 2, since the people in B are made happier by more than the people in A are made unhappy. 4 is no worse than 3, since we are simply introducing folks to each other. But continue this and you reach the repugnant conclusion: a huge swarm of people who are just barely happy is better than a handful of people who are extremely happy.
 
Response: The problem is step 2, which is in fact worse than 1. Parfit assumes that simply adding extra people whose lives are worth living cannot make things worse. But thats ridiculous. Imagine our society, then imagine our society with a bunch more feral people living on the huge island of garbage in the middle of the Pacific, unable to speak except in a growl, with none of the surrounding societies ever noticing. I think the people living in the garbage heaps lives would be worth living (I wouldnt want to kill them, nor would they want to be killed), but I distinctly prefer the former society.
 
Many people say that we shouldnt eat animals, because that would mean killing them. But for many of these animals, if they arent going to be killed and eaten, they would never be born in the first place. What if the animal preferred to have a short, pleasant existence before being consumed as food rather than having no existence at all? Wouldnt that mean we should breed the animal, give it a nice life, then kill and eat it?
 
Response: This is a ridiculous hypothetical  youre suggesting an animal that doesnt exist yet has a preference about existing. I dont respect hypothetical creatures hypothetical desires to not be hypothetical. If I did, you could get me to do all sorts of absurd things just by hypothesizing them. You could, say, simply hypothesize a utility monsters very strong desire to exist and I would be morally bound to try to create one. Or perhaps my hypothetical children really want to exist, so I have to hurry to procreate. Thats ridiculous.
 
I think we should maximize the actual interests of actual people.
 
As a consequentialist, if I support not adding people (as I do in my resolution to 2 and 3), then I must support removing people, since the consequences are identical. If I prefer a society with fewer, happier people, then I must support euthanizing some people to make the rest better off. Sure, there are practical questions with implementing this, but philosophically, I must be in favor of eliminationism.
 
Response: I am not a consequentialist about societies, Im a utilitarian: I think we should work toward outcomes that maximize the interests of individuals.
 
Theres a fundamental disanalogy between addition and contraction. Addition means creating new people with interests that didnt exist before the addition. Contraction, on the other hand, means getting rid of actually-existing people. I do not respect the hypothetical interests of hypothetical individuals to not be hypothetical, but I do respect real people with real interests right now, who presumably have an interest in not being gotten rid of. Thus, I support not getting rid of people and not arbitrarily creating new ones.
 
The problem is also discussed in F.M. Kamm, Disability, Discrimination, and Irrelevant Goods
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March  8, 2010
 
Thanks, nice post.
 
As a consequentialist, if I support not adding people (as I do in my resolution to 2 and 3), then I must support removing people, since the consequences are identical.
 
I dont understand the intuition for thinking that these consequences are identical  it seems to me that removing people from a society is going to affect the existing people in that society more than refusing to create new people will.  The existing citizens might be sad that their loved ones are now gone, or worried that they will be the next person to be involuntarily euthanized.  Their level of upset, multiplied across the entire group, may actually be large enough to deny the removal of the unhappier people on purely consequentialist terms.
 
In other words, I think you might be making the mistake of only looking at the first-order effects of the consequentialist decision to euthanize some people in order to increase happiness.  We dont have to leave societal-scale consequentialism in order to discover that doing this may not be moral:  we just have to drill deeper into the set of consequences and utility changes that the decision would ultimately produce, and not be content to stop at the first measurable change that we find.
 
A similar argument has been leveled at consequentialists regarding torture  something like consequentialists would support torturing one person to definitely save the lives of ten innocents, but we reject torture, therefore consequentialism is defective.  I think the answer is the same as above:  the first-order effect would (were assuming by assertion) be to save ten people, but the second-order effect would be to inflict the societal damage upon each citizen that comes from knowing that you live in a community that is willing to torture, that you might be tortured yourself one day as a result, and that you can no longer claim to be a just and fair society.  That small (compared to the utility cost of innocents dying) decrease in utility per person gets multiplied across the part of population, and possibly even on to new generations as well; maybe its going to be a larger decrease in utility than the decrease caused by the death of the ten innocents and the people who know them.
 
Hope that makes sense.  Im bringing this up because your statement of:
 
I am not a consequentialist about societies, Im a utilitarian: I think we should work toward outcomes that maximize the interests of individuals.
 
isnt a distinction that Id heard before, which makes me wonder whether its actually necessary.  Perhaps we reach the same answers regardless of whether we measure changes to society or changes to individuals, as long as were performing the kind of complete analysis that I describe above?
 
posted by Chris Ball
 on March  8, 2010 #
 
Those are precisely the practical questions that I blocked by fiat. The puzzle requires you imagine the elimination happens in such a way that it doesnt upset or worry anyone left alive.
 
I think one can do the same thing with torture, in which case I think the obvious answer is that in such a scenario torture is OK. The more interesting question, I find, is the similar one Searle poses about freedom of speech.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March  8, 2010 #
 
I enjoyed this post; interesting questions to ponder. I have a few comments/questions:
 
In puzzle 1, I think there might be an error. The second principle should require us to give the kidney to the non-disabled person, no? Following the logic, because both people will surely die without the kidney, maximizing the quality of life in the population means keeping the non-disabled person alive and letting the disabled person die. Perhaps I didnt interpret it correctly
 
Forgive me for generalizingI realize these puzzles dont allow for much nuancebut I sensed some malthusian/neo-malthusian contentions. What are your thoughts?
 
I think your philosophical logic about hypothetical individuals/societies/interest/etc is right on. However, there might be some dangerous implications here. When you ask a collective/nation of individuals to pragmatically define what is hypothetical and what is real, anything outside of their perceived worldview (be it unintentional or intentional) will be defined as hypothetical. In other words, people can choose, or simply remain ignorant, to what is and is not real. This is the inherent problem with puzzle 2; its fragmented inter-group/international context allows hypothetical societies to exist. Applying the same puzzle with a global/systemic perspective makes all groups/nations real.
 
Please let me know what your thoughts are. Again, I liked the post, thanks.
 
posted by Ryan Birkholz
 on March  8, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March  4, 2010
 
Title: On DIRFAs
 
You are traveling in a strange and foreign country, where you dont speak the language, when you run into a friendly old man who gestures for you to follow him back to his hut. There he offers you the choice of one of two different kinds of soup that a woman in the kitchen (his wife, you presume) has made. You choose one and he pours you a bowl. It is delicious and you eat the whole thing before bowing deeply and heading for the door. But he blocks you and stares you down. Youre puzzled; what does he want? He removes a coin from his pocket and begins fingering it. He gestures to your own pocket.
 
You look around and realize you were quite mistaken. This was not a friendly old man inviting you back to his house for supper  this is a barker attracting customers to his restaurant! And now, of course, he wants you to pay.
 
Now you may pay  perhaps because you feel bad for the old man and woman and dont want them to be out money on your account, or perhaps because youve just noticed the menacing broad-shouldered fellow in the corner with a club  but either way, you pay out of some personal desire: a desire to help the couple, or avoid the club.
 
Upon return to the States, you relax from your stressful journey by heading to your favorite restaurant. The waiter brings you a menu listing the various options (it is a classy place, so no prices are marked) and you say that you would prefer one. The waiter eventually returns with it, you eat it, and its delicious.
 
Now the situation, despite seeming very similar, is somehow entirely different. You feel an obligation to stay and pay the bill. Not simply because you dont want to get arrested, or because you want to be able to return to the restaurant later. You have a reason to pay the bill independent of any of your own desires. You must pay the bill because, by sitting down and ordering, you promised you would.
 
One cannot accidentally promise, which is why the promise didnt exist in the foreign country, but you knew full well that ordering at the restaurant in the States was a promise to pay full price at the end of the meal. And by promising, you have created a desire-independent reason for action, or, as I put it, a DIRFA.
 
DIRFAs are surely the most amazing and confounding of all of Searles discoveries. It seems crazy to think that there can be some magical realm, independent of any individual human desire, to which we can be called to account. And yet, there it is. We pay at the restaurant not because we want to, or because we want to help certain others, but because we have committed to doing so and that commitment somehow binds us.
 
In his new book, Making the Social World, Searle shows that, contrary to appearances, DIRFAs (like all social institutions) are merely an outgrowth of language. This is an incredible claim, but Searle makes a convincing case.
 
Imagine saying, Barack Obama is president of the United States. A simple, unexceptional act. But simply by doing it, you have entered into a whole series of social commitments. You have committed that you believe it. If you said it and did not believe it, people could rightly criticize you for lying. And your belief commits you to its truth; if it turned out to be false, people could criticize you for being wrong. You also commit yourself to communicating this belief; if you mumbled and your audience misheard you, you could be criticized for being unclear. If you were speaking to someone who had a friend named Barack Obama and did not know of the other man with the same name who is currently the US President, you could be criticized for being confusing.
 
A simple statement  the physical act consisting of a few vocal cord vibrations and associated lip movements  has pulled you into a whole web of social attachments and commitments. To communicate presupposes a whole system of social ontology.
 
It is difficult to overstate the implications. Much of political thought is about why people participate in institutions that do not benefit them. Why dont the workers rise up and overthrow capitalism if all they have to lose are their chains? Is it because hegemony has persuaded them that the existing order is just and natural? Searle lays the foundations for a much simpler solution.
 
Kaczynski argued that the left was the result of oversocialization. Leftists took the social constraints they were taught  dont discriminate on the basis of race, for example  so strongly that they begin applying them much more widely than the others around them. But Searle shows how this is a necessary outgrowth of empathy, the lefts defining traits: social institutions are grounded in a form of collective intentionality, where others count upon you to obey the institutional rules. Someone who can better imagine others minds must feel this network of expectations on them to be especially strong.
 
This book feels like Searles last book. It weaves together the entire scope of his career  from speech acts, to consciousness, to politics  in a single, stunning answer to this most vexing question: how can we mere sacks of meat, through brute physical acts, create constructions (like promises, or money, or corporations) that can then turn around and bind us. How glorious to see an entire lifetime of work coming together to answer this question at last.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March  4, 2010
 
I dont get it. You pay at the restaurant simply out of a desire to keep your promise (or, if you wish, a desire to avoid the discomfort that would ensue if you didnt do what was normal and committed to). How is this a desire-independent reason for action? Do you have other examples?
 
posted by svat
 on March  4, 2010 #
 
I guess you would be very interested by La nouvelle grille, a book by Henri Laborit (neurosurgeon, ethologist, philosopher, fundamental researcher - inventor of the artificial hibernation and of the first neuroleptic -,  member of the Institute of General Semantics).
 
Unfortunately this book seems to be available only in french, but heres a link to a customer review:
http://www.amazon.com/review/R34J2I4WP7FN0X/ref=cm_cr_rdp_perm
 
posted by Bertrand
 on March  4, 2010 #
 
These actions are very much driven by human desires  social desires. Humans are social animals and want to look good in front of their peers. If you walk out of a restaurant without paying, you will look bad for breaking your promise. No one wants that, and everyone wants to look good in front of their peers.
 
posted by Leo
 on March  4, 2010 #
 
Count me as another reader unconvinced about the existence of DIRFAs.  Care to say a few words about that?  Can you give another example of a DIRFA?
 
posted by Emile
 on March  4, 2010 #
 
I pay in the foreign country because I ate a meal in a restaurant. Why is it any different? Do you steal train rides in foreign countries but not in Boston?
 
If more people stole meals, one would simply have to pay at restaurants before eating just as we now have to for gasoline.
 
The reason paying after the meal exists is that it is simply more efficient to pay after the meal, because during the course of the meal you may order more stuff, e.g. drinks or dessert. This would then require multiple paying operations for a single meal.
 
posted by markymark
 on March  5, 2010 #
 
@ markymark : by stressing on Foreign aaron meant a country where you probably wont be returning again so there is a little incentive to pay by the rule of  reciprocation . so in situation like that there are  othere motivation/compulsion to pay .
 
As i understand DIRFAs are attributes which are implicitly  associated with a particular choice . once you opt for that choice you get tagged with those attributes . irrespective of your explicit consent . like lets say i like I often say I love French people because I love  A) French Cuisine B)French Language and C) French Wine  . but I Dont mean I like French Arrogance . but someone can easily conclude that . i am OK with French style Arrogance too. i am not .
 
posted by Prashant Singh
 on March  5, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March  2, 2010
 
Title: HOWTO: Read more books
 
Title: 1, #2 and #4 are really helpful, I had the same habit of openning a new tab out of nowhere and automatically type in a URL. Blocking is the only way I found too!
 
Ive read a hundred books a year for the past couple years. Last time I mentioned this, a couple people asked how I could read so many books. Do I read unusually quickly? Do I spend an unusual amount of time reading? I did a simple calculation: The average person spends 1704 hours a year watching TV. If the average reading rate is 250 words per minute and the average book is 180,000 words, then thats 142 books a year. To my surprise, I wasnt reading nearly enough books. So Ive taken some steps to read more:
 
Block your favorite blogs. I definitely have the mental habit noted in this xkcd cartoon: at the first sign of mental difficulty, I tab to a different window and begin typing the URL of a favorite blog. This habit is purely automatic, I do it without even thinking about it. As a result, I spend many, many hours a day reading blogs and following their links.
 
To overcome this habit, I added all my favorite blogs to an /etc/hosts file that redirects them to a bogus IP. Now when I type their URLs, I get an error message. I did the same with Hulu and other sites I use to watch TV shows; if you have a real television, be sure to get rid of it too. Now I usually try visiting a couple different blogs before my conscious self realizes whats happening, but this happens soon enough and, over the past couple weeks, Ive managed to pretty much train myself out of this bad habit.
 
Now I either focus on the problem at hand or think enough about it to take a break and go for a walk, eat something, drink some water, read a book, or take a nap.
 
Order lots of books at the library. Most people think the way you read more books is by spending more time reading. But Ive found that, like exercise, this is an effect and not a cause. I spend time reading when I have a great book to read. When I dont, I feel no urge to read and when I do start reading something, I put it down quickly. But if Im reading a great book, I spontaneously come up with times and places to read it.
 
But figuring out which books are great in advance is hard. Peoples experiences about which books they find compelling depend somewhat on their interests and finding accurate critics is problematic. So the best way Ive found to see whether a book is good is to just start reading it.
 
My local library system (Minuteman) allows you to request up to 20 books online and then delivers them to the branch library nearest you. So whenever someone makes a book recommendation or I hear about a book that seems interesting, I request it online. Then I go and pick up a stack of books at the library every week or so.
 
I begin reading them and finish the ones that are exciting enough to finish and return the ones that are unpromising enough to give up on. Then I return them all and get some more.
 
I also find that the due dates and the growing pile of books provides additional impetus to read them. And the habit doesnt cost me any money this way, so I dont feel guilty about it. (Im sure you can come up with reasons I should feel guilty, but the fact remains that I dont.)
 
Alienate everyone close to you. The biggest consumer of time is undoubtedly other people, in large measure because talking to other people is so fun that you dont notice time going by. By keeping yourself away from other people (living alone is a good start), you free up an enormous amount of time for reading. I find this is particularly useful in reading books, since books can usually substitute for human company: you can take them with you on the train and to meals and curl up with them at night and so on.
 
Getting rid of other hobbies no doubt also helps. (And, unlike people, books dont encourage you to have other hobbies.) I didnt have any other hobbies, so this was less of a problem for me, but you may want to think about the things you do instead of reading books and stop doing them.
 
Keep the temperature low. A common problem is falling asleep while reading. But I find its difficult to fall asleep when Im cold (whereas its very easy to sleep when Im warm), so I keep the temperature quite low in my apartment during the day. Even when Im snuggled up in bed, Im usually cold enough that I cant fall asleep.
 
I suspect few people will take all of this advice, but hopefully some of it is useful to you.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March  2, 2010
 
Of course, long ago Cosma Shalizi said all this shorter and better:
 
Where do you find the time to read so much?
 
I dont watch TV, I have no social life, and I read about a page a minute, if there isnt any math to slow me down.
 
but then again, everything I write is just commentaries on off-hand remarks by Cosma.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
Um, #3 seems a little extreme.  Though I guess this is titled how to read more books and not everything in moderation.
 
I also read a lot, but would like to have some evidence that it helps me with my broader life and goals.  Its pretty easy just to read frivolously, like you can watch TV frivolously.
 
posted by Andy C
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
Nice post. And yes, while #3 is a bit extreme, Ive found living near(and using)! a Minuteman library trebled my reading. Good plug for em.
 
posted by Michael Morisy
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
I find audio books another excellent source for getting more reading in.  I use Audible.com as my audio-crack supplier.  Basically, the ability to commute to work listening to a good book makes it much more enjoyable.  Indeed, anytime I need to spend time doing chores (cleaning the kitchen, washing up in the morning, etc) I tend to have the headphones on listening away.  Obviously, when the wife wants to talk, I put them away.  But, when I cant actually sit down to read, audiobooks are there to the rescue.
 
posted by Jason Lotito
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
Getting rid of other hobbies to explore a specific hobby doesnt sound like a good idea unless that specific hobby is going to earn your bread and butter.
 
I see hobbies as complementing each other rather than being destructive to other hobbies.
 
I will try blocking favourite news sites from today and see how that affects my lifestyle. A few good hours should easily be salvaged. Thanks for the post.
 
posted by Vedant L
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
Nice post. Thanks. I have a little rack next to my computer which hold a book open, so I use that same impulse to switch attention to look over at the book instead of a newsfeed (part of the time). Its amazing how much book reading this produces.
 
Also, if youre a good reader, youre an even better scanner. For those books that dont deserve the old word-for-word you can scan through a book quickly and profitably.
 
posted by Dale
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
Good advice Aaron.  One more simple lesson that I learned only in my early twenties.
 
You dont need to finish every book.
 
This is a simple but powerful lesson.  It reduces the mental burden of starting a new book to near zero.  Im now comfortable putting a book down 200 pages in. And that makes it much easier to start the next 600 page novel.
 
High school english classes teach us the wrong way to read books.  It took me a long time to unlearn what I was taught.
 
posted by Matt Brezina
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
This brings up the interesting question of whether reading books is a better use of your time than reading, say, blogs. If you choose the blogs wisely, thats not always the case.
 
It also brings up the question of whether reading books is a better use of time than other hobbies (say, exercise), or than spending time with people.
 
I love reading, but the answers to these questions arent always a given.
 
posted by Leo
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
My tip:  talk with more people who love to read books, and you will read more yourself.
 
posted by cvos man
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
I have another one: stop using your car and start reading on the bus, tram, taxi, metro! But I also think that stop meeting other people, eliminate all other hobbies and stop reading any blogs are not convincing 100%. Reading books is wonderful, but news and newspapers, specific blogs, other hobbies and especially friends are wonderful (and friends also important), too.
 
posted by it's me
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
Maybe I am taking the phrase out of context, but alienate everyone close to you sounds going against a big purpose of reading books - to grow ourselves in the real world. Is there specific type of people you are avoiding? Like you wrote, when we see great books (people) we just make our time and thats healthy, I think, even if it reduces the amount of books read.
 
posted by Isao
 on March  3, 2010 #
 
Listen to audio books while at work.
 
posted by Jason Adams
 on March  3, 2010 #
 
I think eliminating friends and hobbies depends on what your purpose in life is. There are some people worth more than thousands of books, they can teach you some lessons you can never learn from books; books are written by people anyway.
 
I believe a happy person is a person in harmony with his life, knowledge, health, peace of mind are all necessary.
 
posted by Saman
 on March  3, 2010 #
 
There is no frigate like a book
To take us lands away,
Nor any coursers like a page
Of prancing poetry.
This traverse may the poorest take
Without oppress of toll;
How frugal is the chariot
That bears a human soul!
 
posted by Emily Dickinson
 on March  3, 2010 #
 
no. 2 is great!
 
posted by Balakumar Muthu
 on March  3, 2010 #
 
Is the author proposing reading for the sake of reading itself? (Agree with ISAO) I would like to share with my fellow mates to get different perspectives on the things i read. Published authors are not know it alls(Just read some of the investing guides just b4 the financial crisis for a taste of this.)
 
But nice post
 
posted by newtaraday
 on March  3, 2010 #
 
lol I average 5-10 books a week WITHOUT doing any of these. But then, I dont watch TV. I dont want to even imagine how high my average would get if I cut out internet time. I think Im doing just fine.
 
posted by shawna
 on March  3, 2010 #
 
I dont understand the authors point. Reading blogs is reading. As well as reading comic books or user manuals. Or nutriment information on the back of boxed cereals.
 
I have the same problem with people who believe that someone whos reading non fiction has no culture compared to someone reading novels. Are novels superior to non-fiction? Are books superior to blogs? Another example of that way of thinking: lucid dream forums. People there are counting their lucid dreams, and aim for the maximal number of lucid dreams.
 
I say: whats the point? Bragging rights in your e-mail signature? This year I read 154 books and had 485 lucid dreams. Whos got the highest score? Its not a video game.
 
I understand the blog post may have been designed to attract such reactions. But in case someones doubting: reading is about diversity, pleasure and discovery. Not olympic performance.
 
posted by HED
 on March  3, 2010 #
 
I love point three and laughed when I read the title.  The only suggestion I would add is suggestions on how to alienate other people, but that could be a completely new post all together.
 
posted by Jacob W
 on March  3, 2010 #
 
Wow this is impressive. Though I wonder, do you think you would you still read so quickly if more of the books were fiction? Or perhaps a better way to phrase it: would reading fiction at this rate be desirable?
 
posted by Rachel Rosenfelt
 on March  3, 2010 #
 
Im french, so sorry for the faults. I hope Ill be understandable
 
Watching television or a play in a theatre, if you are active, mentally active, can be compared to the fact of reading (receiving and treating information, eventually stocking then transmit this information or the result(s) of its tranformation(s)), and at the opposite you can read a lot of words without understanding it, or, even if you understand the words and what they probably mean, those readings can still be unusefull for you, for the others, or worse, they can be dangerous.
 
After you read a book, watched a stupid video on a web site or have been the witness of something particular in the street, the point, in my humble opinion, is  : what are you doing with this ? how did you receive, treat and then maybe stock and/or communicate those informations ? because for each of those cases, you can act/think like a mollusk, like a pre-human, like a human, or 
like what the humans are aiming to. You (its a general you, not a you==Aaron ;) can read 389 books a year (or a day !) but if you are stupid and anti-sexy as a computer, youll die stupid and virgin.
 
posted by Bertrand
 on March  4, 2010 #
 
Wow a lot of people dont seem to see the back-handed wit in #3. Do I detect remorse for alienating someone recently? I hope not I hope things are going well, Aaron.
 
posted by Dan Connolly
 on March  5, 2010 #
 
If I blocked reading blogs, I would not reach this article, then I would not know that I should block it! :)
 
posted by Ping
 on March  5, 2010 #
 
Any plans for what youll do with all that knowledge once youve finished accumulating it?
 
Reading a ton of books is not a goal that appeals to me.  I like learning as I do things, so I can apply knowledge right after picking it up.  If you read a book without having an application in mind for the information in it, you run the risk of never actually using that information.  (Of course there is also information in some books that you wouldnt know to look for, though.)
 
posted by John Maxwell IV
 on March  5, 2010 #
 
I can read 20~30 books per year. There is a big gap between you and me. ^_^ I did a translation(into chinese) work on this essay, link: http://wavebehind.org/2010/03/how-to-read-more-books.html
 
posted by Allen
 on March  5, 2010 #
 
I feel there are some misleading concepts here, rather than reading more books there should be more important to read better the books as well as to read high quality books (with high interest). When I was a little boy I devoured the books, they did last top 1 - 2 days no matter there were 100 - 350 pags, but after several years I read again some of those books and I noticed I got / understood / discovered much more stuff.
 
Also its worth considering that as the time pass you go discovering new reading strategies, so on there are books that deserve a full detailed reading while with others a fast reading will do. No one is more important than the other, they are better for some situations / books.
 
I noted some very insteresting comments about the other info source. Sometimes a picture its worth thousands words. So books are only a fraction of the useful / insteresting / etc etc resources around. In my university studies sure books are important, but they are really valuable when you combine it with videos, images, the practice**- experience etc etc, the other sources open you as well to other perspectives wich are really really important for creating new understandings, new links (that a book may be unable to do alone).
 
I cant avoid not to mention the T. of multiple intelligences, if Im not wrong Howard Gardner defined eight independent intellingeces, well reading may apply to only one.
 
Last but no less, I totally disagree to the Alienate everyone close to you. Are you a sort of autoist guy?? Social activities are very important, so if you actually dedicate most of your time to work and reading you dont know what you are missing!
 
posted by Phil D.
 on March  8, 2010 #
 
You are hilarious! Either that, or as my kids say, a funsucker who sucks the fun out of erwell: life. Kidshey kids must be killing my reading averagebetter put that on the list, too.
 
thanks for the post.
 
posted by Theodore Mook
 on March  8, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March  1, 2010
 
Title: HOWTO: Lose weight
 
The standard advice for losing weight is to eat less and exercise.
 
Exercise is almost worthless as a weight-loss strategy: the number of calories you burn through exercise is miniscule and typically more than made up by your instinct to eat a little extra after exercising. Increased exercise is a consequence of losing weight, not a cause  when you lose weight you will have more energy and it will be easier to move, so you will then exercise. You have to lose weight first.
 
That leaves eating less. I have found three strategies to be effective here:
 
Get rid of all snacks.  It used to be when I was hungry, Id just grab a snack from the kitchen. It got so I basically did this without thinking and, as a result, I ended up eating a lot of snacks. Now the only food I have is unprepared; if I want to eat, I have to consider it and take the time to actually cook something or travel to someplace that sells prepared food.
 
Drink more water. There are lots of reasons to drink more water, but its also a great way to lose weight. A lot of what feels like hunger is actually thirst, while having water in your stomach seems to counteract certain feelings of hunger. Furthermore, burning fat requires extra water.
 
Dont be afraid to be hungry. This is no doubt my most controversial tactic, but I do tend to think the body has a set point for the number of calories its used to consuming. Lowering that set point may mean ignoring a bout of hunger or two and possibly even going a whole day without eating. But after that, your body gets full after eating much less. Again: Im not saying more than a day  this isnt anorexia  but a one-day fast is far from unheard of.
 
This may be easier for me since I almost always eat meals alone, making it no big deal if I skip them. People who eat meals with others may need to get used to only eating a side dish or just nibbling at their order.
 
Losing weight has been better than I ever imagined. Not only am I dramatically thinner, but I have more energy, I waste less time eating, and I now like the way I look. Im much more flexible and mobile and, most incredibly, Ive gotten taller  this at the age of 23. (A lot of people are skeptical that Ive actually grown taller, but the changes are measurable and dramatic and come with all the symptoms of height growth I remember from my childhood (including the strange urge to stretch vertically on a regular basis). I suppose its possible the height difference simply results from better posture, but that seems worth counting.)
 
I do not propose a new diet or some new theory. These are very simple commonsense tips: remove temptation, get enough water, remove obligation. But Ive found theyve been enough for me to lose dramatic amounts of weight. I used to be embarrassingly chubby, now people worry I have anorexia.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March  1, 2010
 
Yes, this is called the starvation diet. Its been done a few times before. You read Good Calories, Bad Calories?
 
posted by john P. Speno
 on March  1, 2010 #
 
Was the point to change your shape or become more healthy?
 
Ive started running for the first time for the last few months.  Im much much stronger and have much more energy, though Ive probably gained weight if anything.  (Which has me pushing 220.)  Mostly Ive been trying to learn how to run, with fat loss being a secondary goal.  I do wonder though how much easier it would be if I wasnt lugging all this mass around
 
Getting core strength has improved my posture and thus my height; lifting up the rib cage makes a big difference.
 
posted by Will Schenk
 on March  1, 2010 #
 
Exercise only works as a weight-loss strategy if you exercise enough to burn off your bodys sugar stores and get your body into fat-burning mode. This is actually quite difficult  it takes longer than most people are willing to exercise.
 
posted by Wayne
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
When the body is undergoing caloric restriction, it not only uses stored fat to produce energy but also excess muscle. Anyone who sets themselves up with the myopic goal of losing weight can succeed, at least for a time, with simple caloric restriction. However, one of the results is a lowered metabolic rate. This is why people who successfully diet and then revert to a normal diet not only gain their lost weight back but actually add more. Understanding that ones metabolic rate is decreasing along with ones weight is mandatory to successfully maintain weight loss attained via simple caloric restriction.
 
When you say that Exercise is almost worthless as a weight-loss strategy, you are only right if you are talking about low-intensity endurance exercise. However, as low-intensity endurance exercise has cardiovascular benefits, its foolish to dismiss it if one is concerned about actually being healthy instead of just being skinny.
 
Your dismissal of exercise as a successful weight loss strategy is most wrong when speaking of resistance training. Resistance training increases the metabolic rate, meaning one can often not only eat the same amount and lose weight but can even eat more and still lose weight. Moreover, combining resistance training with low-intensity endurance exercise is a great way to burn fat, especially when undergoing moderate caloric restriction. The resistance training mitigates the loss of muscle mass and decrease of metabolic rate while the low-intensity endurance exercise becomes ever more effective as the bodys lean muscle mass increases.
 
Given that a major contributor to adult obesity is the gradual loss of muscle mass associated with aging and the resultant decline in metabolic rate, it is irresponsible to promote methods that will result in further decreases in metabolic rate, the which most often leads of itself to obesity as it becomes increasingly difficult to eat smaller and smaller amounts over time. Caloric restriction alone is not a viable long-term solution for optimum health and fitness. The best way to obtain a healthy body and maintain it through the decades is a combination of good nutrition and regular exercise, the latter of which should include intense resistance training and a cardiovascular endurance regimen.
 
posted by Ferdinand Bardamu
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
Thats how I lost weight  eat less. Pretty simple. Im pretty sure John Walker would agree: http://www.fourmilab.ch/hackdiet/www/hackdiet.html
 
posted by srid
 on March  2, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: February 11, 2010
 
Title: When Is Transparency Useful?
 
The following essay appears in the new OReilly book Open Government and attempts to combine and clarify some of the points I made in previous essays. It was written in June 2009.
 
Transparency is a slippery word; the kind of word that, like reform, sounds good and so ends up getting attached to any random political thing that someone wants to promote. But just as its silly to talk about whether reform is useful (it depends on the reform), talking about transparency in general wont get us very far. Everything from holding public hearings to requiring police to videotape interrogations can be called transparencytheres not much thats useful to say about such a large category.
 
In general, you should be skeptical whenever someone tries to sell you on something like reform or transparency. In general, you should be skeptical. But in particular, reactionary political movements have long had a history of cloaking themselves in nice words. Take the Good Government (goo-goo) movement early in the twentieth century. Funded by prominent major foundations, it claimed that it was going to clean up the corruption and political machines that were hindering city democracy. Instead, the reforms ended up choking democracy itself, a response to the left-wing candidates who were starting to get elected.
 
The goo-goo reformers moved elections to off-years. They claimed this was to keep city politics distinct from national politics, but the real effect was just to reduce turnout. They stopped paying politicians a salary. This was supposed to reduce corruption, but it just made sure that only the wealthy could run for office. They made the elections nonpartisan. Supposedly this was because city elections were about local issues, not national politics, but the effect was to increase the power of name recognition and make it harder for voters to tell which candidate was on their side. And they replaced mayors with unelected city managers, so winning elections was no longer enough to effect change.1
 
Of course, the modern transparency movement is very different from the Good Government movement of old. But the story illustrates that we should be wary of kind nonprofits promising to help. I want to focus on one particular strain of transparency thinking and show how it can go awry. It starts with something thats hard to disagree with.
 
Modern society is made of bureaucracies and modern bureaucracies run on paper: memos, reports, forms, filings. Sharing these internal documents with the public seems obviously good, and indeed, much good has come out of publishing these documents, whether its the National Security Archive, whose Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests have revealed decades of government wrongdoing around the globe, or the indefatigable Carl Malamud and his scanning, which has put terabytes of useful government documents, from laws to movies, online for everyone to access freely.
 
I suspect few people would put publishing government documents on the Web high on their list of political priorities, but its a fairly cheap project (just throw piles of stuff into scanners) and doesnt seem to have much downside. The biggest concernprivacyseems mostly taken care of. In the United States, FOIA and the Privacy Act (PA) provide fairly clear guidelines for how to ensure disclosure while protecting peoples privacy.
 
Perhaps even more useful than putting government documents online would be providing access to corporate and nonprofit records. A lot of political action takes place outside the formal government, and thus outside the scope of the existing FOIA laws. But such things seem totally off the radar of most transparency activists; instead, giant corporations that receive billions of dollars from the government are kept impenetrably secret.
 
Many policy questions are a battle of competing interestsdrivers dont want cars that roll over and kill them when they make a turn, but car companies want to keep selling such cars. If youre a member of Congress, choosing between them is difficult. On the one hand are your constituents, who vote for you. But on the other hand are big corporations, which fund your reelection campaigns. You really cant afford to offend either one too badly.
 
So, theres a tendency for Congress to try a compromise. Thats what happened with, for example, the Transportation Recall Enhancement, Accountability, and Documentation (TREAD) Act. Instead of requiring safer cars, Congress simply required car companies to report how likely their cars were to roll over. Transparency wins again!
 
Or, for a more famous example: after Watergate, people were upset about politicians receiving millions of dollars from large corporations. But, on the other hand, corporations seem to like paying off politicians. So instead of banning the practice, Congress simply required that politicians keep track of everyone who gives them money and file a report on it for public inspection.
 
I find such practices ridiculous. When you create a regulatory agency, you put together a group of people whose job is to solve some problem. Theyre given the power to investigate whos breaking the law and the authority to punish them. Transparency, on the other hand, simply shifts the work from the government to the average citizen, who has neither the time nor the ability to investigate these questions in any detail, let alone do anything about it. Its a farce: a way for Congress to look like it has done something on some pressing issue without actually endangering its corporate sponsors.
 
Heres where the technologists step in. Something is too hard for people? they hear. We know how to fix that. So they download a copy of the database and pretty it up for public consumptiongenerating summary statistics, putting nice pictures around it, and giving it a snazzy search feature and some visualizations. Now inquiring citizen can find out whos funding their politicians and how dangerous their cars are just by going online.
 
The wonks love this. Still stinging from recent bouts of deregulation and antigovernment zealotry, many are now skeptical about government. We cant trust the regulators, they say. We need to be able to investigate the data for ourselves. Technology seems to provide the perfect solution. Just put it all onlinepeople can go through the data while trusting no one.
 
Theres just one problem: if you cant trust the regulators, what makes you think you can trust the data?
 
The problem with generating databases isnt that theyre too hard to read; its the lack of investigation and enforcement power, and websites do nothing to help with that. Since no ones in charge of verifying them, most of the things reported in transparency databases are simply lies. Sometimes theyre blatant lies, like how some factories keep two sets of books on workplace injuries: one accurate one, reporting every injury, and one to show the government, reporting just 10% of them.2 But they can easily be subtler: forms are misfiled or filled with typos, or the malfeasance is changed in such a way that it no longer appears on the form. Making these databases easier to read results only in easier-to-read lies.
 
Three examples:
 
Congresss operations are supposedly open to the public, but if you visit the House floor (or if you follow what theyre up to on one of these transparency sites) you find that they appear to spend all their time naming post offices. All the real work is passed using emergency provisions and is tucked into subsections of innocuous bills. (The bank bailouts were put in the Paul Wellstone Mental Health Act.) Matt Taibbis The Great Derangement tells the story.
 
Many of these sites tell you who your elected official is, but what impact does your elected official really have? For 40 years, people in New York thought they were governed by their elected officialstheir city council, their mayor, their governor. But as Robert Caro revealed in The Power Broker, they were all wrong. Power in New York was controlled by one man, a man who had consistently lost every time hed tried to run for office, a man nobody thought of as being in charge at all: Parks Commissioner Robert Moses.
 
Plenty of sites on the Internet will tell you who your representative receives money from, but disclosed contributions are just the tip of the iceberg. As Ken Silverstein points out in his series of pieces for Harpers (some of which he covers in his book Turkmeniscam), being a member of Congress provides for endless ways to get perks and cash while hiding where it comes from.
 
Fans of transparency try to skirt around this. OK, they say, but surely some of the data will be accurate. And even if it isnt, wont we learn something from how people lie? Perhaps thats true, although its hard to think of any good examples. (In fact, its hard to think of any good examples of transparency work accomplishing anything, except perhaps for more transparency.) But everything has a cost.
 
Hundreds of millions of dollars have been spent funding transparency projects around the globe. That money doesnt come from the sky. The question isnt whether some transparency is better than none; its whether transparency is really the best way to spend these resources, whether they would have a bigger impact if spent someplace else.
 
I tend to think they would. All this money has been spent with the goal of getting a straight answer, not of doing anything about it. Without enforcement power, the most readable database in the world wont accomplish mucheven if its perfectly accurate. So people go online and see that all cars are dangerous and that all politicians are corrupt. What are they supposed to do then?
 
Sure, perhaps they can make small changesthis politician gets slightly less oil money than that one, so Ill vote for her (on the other hand, maybe shes just a better liar and gets her oil money funneled through PACs or foundations or lobbyists)but unlike the government, they cant solve the bigger issue: a bunch of people reading a website cant force car companies to make a safe car. Youve done nothing to solve the real problem; youve only made it seem more hopeless: all politicians are corrupt, all cars are dangerous. What can you do?
 
Whats ironic is that the Internet does provide something you can do. It has made it vastly easier, easier than ever before, to form groups with people and work together on common tasks. And its through people coming togethernot websites analyzing datathat real political progress can be made.
 
So far weve seen baby stepspeople copying what they see elsewhere and trying to apply it to politics. Wikis seem to work well, so you build a political wiki. Everyone loves social networks, so you build a political social network. But these tools worked in their original setting because they were trying to solve particular problems, not because theyre magic. To make progress in politics, we need to think best about how to solve its problems, not simply copy technologies that have worked in other fields.
Data analysis can be part of it, but its part of a bigger picture. Imagine a team of people coming together to tackle some issue they care aboutfood safety, say. You can have technologists poring through safety records, investigative reporters making phone calls and sneaking into buildings, lawyers subpoenaing documents and filing lawsuits, political organizers building support for the project and coordinating volunteers, members of Congress pushing for hearings on your issues and passing laws to address the problems you uncover, and, of course, bloggers and writers to tell your stories as they unfold.
 
Imagine it: an investigative strike team, taking on an issue, uncovering the truth, and pushing for reform. Theyd use technology, of course, but also politics and the law. At best, a transparency law gets you one more database you can look at. But a lawsuit (or congressional investigation)? You get to subpoena all the databases, as well as the source records behind them, then interview people under oath about what it all means. You get to ask for what you need, instead of trying to predict what you may someday want.
 
This is where data analysis can be really useful. Not in providing definitive answers over the Web to random surfers, but in finding anomalies and patterns and questions that can be seized upon and investigated by others. Not in building finished products, but by engaging in a process of discovery.
But this can be done only when members of this investigative strike team work in association with others. They would do what it takes to accomplish their goals, not be hamstrung by arbitrary divisions between technology and journalism and politics.
 
Right now, technologists insist that theyre building neutral platforms for anyone to find data on any issue. Journalists insist that theyre objective observers of the facts. And political types assume they already know the answers and dont need to investigate further questions. Theyre each in their own silo, unable to see the bigger picture.
 
I certainly was. I care passionately about these issuesI dont want politicians to be corrupt; I dont want cars to kill peopleand as a technologist Id love to be able to solve them. Thats why I got swept up in the promise of transparency. It seemed like just by doing the things I knew how to do bestwrite code, sift through databasesI could change the world.
 
But it just doesnt work. Putting databases online isnt a silver bullet, as nice as the word transparency may sound. But it was easy to delude myself. All I had to do was keep putting things online and someone somewhere would find a use for them. After all, thats what technologists do, right? The World Wide Web wasnt designed for publishing the newsit was designed as a neutral platform that could support anything from scientific publications to pornography.
 
Politics doesnt work like that. Perhaps at some point putting things on the front page of the New York Times guaranteed that they would be fixed, but that day is long past. The pipeline of leak to investigation to revelation to report to reform has broken down. Technologists cant depend on journalists to use their stuff; journalists cant depend on political activists to fix the problems they uncover. Change doesnt come from thousands of people, all going their separate ways. Change requires bringing people together to work on a common goal. Thats hard for technologists to do by themselves.
 
But if they do take that as their goal, they can apply all their talent and ingenuity to the problem. They can measure their success by the number of lives that have been improved by the changes they fought for, rather than the number of people who have visited their website. They can learn which technologies actually make a difference and which ones are merely indulgences. And they can iterate, improve, and scale.
 
Transparency can be a powerful thing, but not in isolation. So, lets stop passing the buck by saying our job is just to get the data out there and its other peoples job to figure out how to use it. Lets decide that our job is to fight for good in the world. Id love to see all these amazing resources go to work on that.
 
Thanks to Andy Oram and Andy Eggers for their insightful comments on earlier versions of this essay.
 
For more, see http://sociology.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/power/local.html.
 
Fast Food Nation, Eric Schlosser, Houghton Mifflin, 2001. [p. 180]
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 11, 2010
 
Sounds like you need a political party to watch the other political parties what about using an existing one (ie the greens) to try and bring some of this stuff together? At least you have a group of focused people with different skills, technologists, journalists, lawyers, etc. But maybe the partisan nature of any particular group would not suit your goals here.
 
posted by Mal
 on February 11, 2010 #
 
Youve done nothing to solve the real problem; youve only made it seem more hopeless: all politicians are corrupt, all cars are dangerous. What can you do?
 
Because car companies wouldnt try to make safer cars to steal customers from other car companies.  Its one thing to be skeptical of market incentives, its another to write them off completely.
 
Im disturbed by your suggestion that there is some ideal level of safety that everyone agrees upon but politicians are too corrupt to enforce.  Democracy is a blunt instrument.  People have different opinions about how safe of a life they should lead.  Should helmets be required for motorcycles, bicycles, cars, walking?  Does every carrot grown by farmers need to be inspected for safety?  Real issues always involve trade-offs.
 
Lastly, what makes you think that your investigative strike team will be any different than the Good Government movement of the past.  Even individual citizens have agendas.  You get excited at the prospect of using government power to subpoena witnesses.  But, such power can easily be abused.  Watch any crime show and youll see the temptation to abuse such powers.
 
posted by Chris
 on February 12, 2010 #
 
Have you heard of the legal system? Why not focus on helping prosecutors create new data mining tools?
 
If you read the complaint against Ted Stevens youll see that people can get in trouble with fraudulently complying with transparency measures in place.  If youll read the Duke Cunningham case youll see how much trouble people will go to in order to try to avoid having to disclose shady dealings.
 
I dont understand how FBI/*BI/federal prosecutor teams arent investigative strike teams.  Id love to see more prosecutors and more resources allocated to anti-corruption investigations.  Why not focus on that goal?
 
posted by Jeremy
 on February 13, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: February 10, 2010
 
Title: The Vioxx Story
 
In his book Doubt is Their Product, David Michaels (currently head of OSHA) tells the Vioxx story in a way Id never heard before (pp. 146-147):
 
Aspirin and Aleve work by inhibiting the COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes. Inhibiting COX-2 lessens pain, but inhibiting COX-1 causes stomach problems like bleeding and ulcers. So the new class of COX-2 inhibitors, like Vioxx, were supposed to stop the pain without the nasty stomach side-effects.
 
Of course, aspirin has the additional side effect of protecting your heart, so when they designed a study demonstrating the benefits of Vioxx, they made sure to a) exclude anyone with heart problems, and b) compare it against Aleve, which doesnt have the same beneficial effects for the heart.
 
The result of the study was shocking: despite all these efforts, the people who took Vioxx had 4 times the number of heart problems as the people who took Aleve. So what did the makers of Vioxx do? They told the FDA that this study showed how incredibly effective Aleve was at reducing heart attacks! Yes, it wasnt that Vioxx increased the risk of a heart attack by 4 times  it was that Aleve magically reduced heart attacks by 80%.
 
And the FDA believed them.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 10, 2010
 
I think believe is an overly strong word here. Belief requires paying attention.
 
posted by q
 on February 11, 2010 #
 
why does this not surprise me?
 
it comes down to a question of incentives, i think. obviously the drug companies have an incentive to figure out a way to push a new drug through, especially if theyve already spent millions on research and development.
 
but what incentives does the FDA have, exactly? on what does an FDA employees salary depend?
 
obviously i have no real way of knowing. but my guess is that it doesnt depend on making sure that its approvals are super-accurate.
 
misguided incentives are why i find it very difficult to trust anyone in the federal government.
 
posted by nic pfost
 on February 11, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January 30, 2010
 
Title: Fewer Representatives or More Monitors?
 
Matt Yglesias saw Lawrence Lessig speak about the problem of money in politics concluded his concern on the influence of money in politics was too narrow. I tend to agree that Lessigs focus is a bit too narrow  thats why I started the PCCC  but I was shocked by Yglesias broader solution: fewer elected officials.
 
Matts focus on institutional reforms is definitely a well-needed antidote to most political journalists tendency to focus on personalities and other small-picture details, but in this instance its just crazy. In what sense is the number of elected officials broader than the influences that come to bear on them?
 
Matt seems to be arguing that countries with fewer elected officials are better run because voters can monitor the performance of those officials better. I dont see how this argument can possibly survive engagement with the details of our political system.
 
Lets take health care, since thats in the news lately. Health care has basically been talked about nonstop by every news outlet, yet even voters who follow these things in detail have no clue whats really in it. (This is true even of my friends who are political junkies; they know a public option isnt in the bill, but they basically have no idea what the exchanges are or how they would work.) When election season rolls around, campaigns will begin running lots of ads about the health care bill. None of these ads will help inform them whats in it. And the press will continue not to inform them about whats in it.
 
I dont see how having fewer elected officials will change any of this. The problem is not that voters try to monitor their elected officials but are simply overwhelmed; the problem is that voters have no tools for actually monitoring their elected officials in any meaningful sense. Yes, one can point to a Chris Hayes flowchart here or an Alec MacGillis guide there, but theres no way any significant number of voters know how to find those things. And even if you tell them about those, theres no system for finding similar documents about issues in the future.
 
And thats the biggest issue Congress is considering this session! And thats just its broadest outlines! The health care bill has thousands of pages of detailed provisions and its just one of thousands of bills Congress is trying to pass. Theres nobody whos even reading all of those provisions, let alone trying to figure out which ones are good ideas and which representatives are fighting for the good ideas.
 
Instead, theres a vast industry of lobbyists, each of which care really deeply about a handful of those tiny issues and are willing to spend vast amounts of money and effort persuading members of Congress to take their side. On most issues, they face no opposition. So naturally, the members take their side.
 
Whats needed is not fewer representatives, but better monitoring systems and institutional incentives to make monitoring less necessary. Better monitoring systems is what Im working on and better institutional incentives is what Lessig is fighting for. If Matt thinks that fewer representatives is a better or broader solution, Id like to hear him explain how its going to help.
 
Disclosure: Im on the board of Lessigs group, Change Congress.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 30, 2010
 
Sadly, campaign finance reform and improved monitoring are both inadequate.  What is needed is a change from single-winner elections to a more representative electoral system.
 
Yglesias provocative suggestion points toward the sole deep issue in government which is the meaning and quality of representation.  From the citizen standpoint, you only need one good representative.  From the social standpoint, the number of representatives in a body ought to be related to the number of political positions we want represented.  The solution is to weight the votes of the representatives.
 
Erdman and Susskinds The Cure For Our Broken Political Process shows how negotiation of difficult issues is impossible given our electoral system.  Meaningful representation is necessary for the principal-agent trust that allows negotiation to succeed.  Both authors are Cambridge-based, fwiw.
 
I would add that single-winner systems encourage a power/dominance model of politics which is inferior to a negotiation-based approach.
 
posted by Paul
 on January 31, 2010 #
 
I feel almost stupid for saying this, but isnt less government a good option, too?  All of this discussion about money in politics begs the question why?  When the government is responsible for apportioning so much money, it is no wonder this is the case.  (I would stretch to argue that this is why corruption is so rampant in many - not all - countries where the government consumes large portions of the GDP.)  The same could be said about the argument of representation.  Using a surrogate to make decisions that you should be responsible for yourself leads to necessary inefficiencies and the impossibility of representing the will of the represented.  I am not saying we cant make improvements, but there are implicit problems in proxy decision making that will be there regardless of the representative to represented ratio.
 
posted by Steve Fettig
 on February  1, 2010 #
 
Much of your argument seems orthogonal to the one Yglesias is making.
 
Do you think electing judges is a good idea?
 
posted by Jeremy
 on February  4, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January 27, 2010
 
Title: Is Apple Evil?
 
Todays iPad introduction has to be about the most depressing Apple product launch Ive ever watched. As has been noted, Jobs Reality Distortion Field only works when he believes in what hes selling and he didnt seem to really believe in this. The audience must have further added to the disappointment, expecting a revolutionary product and only getting an oversized iPhone (iPod touch, actually).
 
Thats not to say the iPad wont sell, or that I dont want one. The scariest thing is that I think it probably will. Its clear that Apple plans for the iPhone OS to be the future of its product line. And thats scary because the iPhone OS is designed for Apples total control.
 
A lot of people have argued that requiring Apple to approve every application for the iPhone OS is some kind of mistake, something theyll remedy as soon as they realize how bad things have gotten. But recent events  Phil Schillers personal interventions, comments on their call to analysts, etc.  have made it clear its not a mistake at all. Its their plan.
 
The iPad is their attempt to extend this total control to whats traditionally been thought of as the computer space. This is just the first step, but its not hard to imagine Apple doing their best to phase out the Macintosh in the next decade, just as they phased out OS 9. In their ideal world, all computing will be done on the iPhone OS.
 
And the iPhone OS will only run software that they specifically approve. No Flash or other alternate runtimes, no one-off apps or open source customizations. Just total control by Apple. Its a frightening future.
 
I dont know why theyre doing it. Its hard to see how it makes them more money. (Curating all those apps must be expensive, not to mention the lost sales from the unapproved ones.) I can only presume its a result of Jobs megalomaniacal need for control  not only does the hardware have to be flawless, the software must be too. And the only way to ensure that is to have Apple approve every inch of it.
 
I love Apple products. Im a huge Apple fan. Id buy an iPad right now if I could. But, for the first time, Ive got a real sinking feeling in my stomach.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 27, 2010
 
Agreed. Been using Apple stuff since 1982, and Ive had the sinking feeling for a while now 
 
posted by Dan Stocker
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
Good lord.. get a grip.. Apples offering the best mobile experience, and the best development platform available and all you can do is get a sinking feeling about their alleged control freakery?
Maybe they just want to offer an ALTERNATIVE to whats on offer. After all, you dont have to buy anything they make; there are hundreds of alternatives to Apple products.
Why are they popular? Because they offer the best user experience. Geeks may hate it, but users - ie. real people - love it.
If youre really worried I suggest you buy a Windows-based tablet, and a Windows Mobile phone, because theyre much better solutions arent they? I mean all that open-ness and adherence to non-proprietary standards - exemplary!
 
Flash will be irrelevant soon. Its a closed system controlled by Adobe. What Apple are doing is in fact forcing developers to embrace OPEN non-proprietory standards. The eBook standard theyre using is - unlike the Kindles - and OPEN standard.
 
I could go on.
 
And thats a good thing, not a bad one. Apple may want to control the user experience, but hundreds of millions of users like what theyre offering. If they - like you - dont, then they can go buy an Android, a Linux, or a Windows, or a Symbian solution cant they.
 
posted by Tommo_UK
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
Im a programmer, and a big fan of the iPhone but only because phone devices are so bad.  I dont, however, think this will be as successful. Sure, I think it will sell really well, but thats because its priced to sell correctly.
 
Even if it sells really well, Id be surprised to see people using it as their primary computer device, or become as ubiquitous as the iPhone.  People use the iPhone as their primary computer device when theyre commuting or traveling. This seems too big for commuters to casually have with them, and not useful enough for travelers once they arrive.
 
Maybe theyll filling this uncanny-valley niche. Maybe they can pull it off and Im sure theyll do a better job than competitors, but this feels like something Id purchase and not use a month later.
 
posted by Justin
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
The sheer rawness of your thoughts is nothing short of awe-inspiring.
 
posted by 
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
I doubt flawlessness has got anything to do with the approval process. Apple wants to have the ability to stop or delay any software that competes with their business, see google voice.
 
posted by Gilette
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
I dont think theyll phase out the Mac, so much as just extend their control to the Mac, or try to anyway.
 
The good news is, that will take a good amount of time to actually accomplish & alternate platforms exist.
 
The bad news? Alternate platforms will likely never be on par with the experience Apple providers & this will take considerably less time than just phasing out the Mac altogether, but at least in the first scenario, Jobs would probably retire (one way or another) before it finished.
 
Better news? They may never try to change Macs to be like iPhones, its certainly something they have or will at least seriously consider & may even be trying to figure out how to do now, but its just as likely theyll never put the Mac behind a walled garden, so I wouldnt worry about it very much.
 
posted by Sebastian Lewis
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
The console market works this way, and has no lack of innovative software. Also note the iPhone app store is getting software into the hands of millions of mobile users in a way which simply didnt exist before. Not all users are engineers.
 
posted by Gaurav Sharma
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
I had similar thoughts during the announcement. The one point for me that keeps this theorythat Jobs wants the future of computing to be an entirely curated experiencefrom being completely compelling is Apples own WebKit team, which has done as much to push modern web standards forward as anyone, and with HTML5, , more CSS, and faster and better JavaScript (i.e., access to more system APIs), theres a gaping hole in the fortress you can drive a Mack truck (or Google Voice, for example) through, and its getting bigger. The space between the capabilities of web apps and native apps is getting smaller all the time, due in no small part to Apple itself. Perhaps this tension/contradiction is actually part of what enables Apple to make products that geeks and mass market electronics consumers alike appreciate.
 
posted by Paul Smith
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
I mostly agree. But what you dont understand is so simple: youre already answering your own question. You love apple products BECAUSE theyre controlled by apple. Because every inch is done the apple way. Because things work as expected (and dont crash like adobe flash). I can continue count on
 
posted by Konstantin
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
I had a similar sinking feeling upon looking through the iPads picture gallery on Apples site. I cant shake the feeling that the (default) lack of a physical keyboard implies the internet is becoming less of a conversationmaybe a slightly less passive television?
 
But like you, I cant entirely deny its appeal. Unsettling!
 
posted by Jon
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
You dont know why theyre doing it (phasing out Mac OS) because theyre not. Apple has just invested a lot of time and resources in Snow Leopard. They could have done another feature-rich release that buys them time until theyre ready to pull the plug, but instead they spent a major release making sure the OS has a strong foundation under the hood.
 
If youre going to make such harsh conclusions about the company, you should look at their entire product line instead of a single product at its first release, where they need to have this level of control to be able to speak semi-confidently about its battery life.
 
posted by Bart
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
How many of Snow Leopards improvements cant be used on a future iPad? They both run OS X, you know.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
You are completely wrong. You can still write web apps for the iPhone/iPad/Touch, which have a lot of the functionality of native apps (GPS, Sounds, Vibrate, etc) You can always use this way to get around the Apple Approval problem, which are good for most things except maybe games.
 
I just wish Apple would make an approved way to jailbreak the device. This would keep everyone happy.
 
posted by 
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
I had a very similar reaction, something like oh no, theyre going to keep pushing this closed model and it could easily become their primary business. But I think I understand why theyre doing it.
 
Most people dont understand file systems, so theyve taken out the file system access. Most people dont understand app crashes, so theyre trying to prevent those from happening. Most people dont understand how to download and install apps, so theyre making that incredibly simple. Control for Apple is just a means to the end of a specific user experience. Thats not a user experience you or I care much about, but I know plenty of people who will prefer it to the confused metaphors that make up the standard OS experience.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
The best development platform available? I can point you at a lot of iPhone developers that would disagree. Just being able to release a bugfix in less than two weeks would be a big improvement.
 
As for the open format theyre using for books (EPUB, I assume you mean); the Sony Reader uses that open format as well. Id like to see how many EPUB books you buy at the iBookstore you can transfer to your Sony Reader and read.
 
That said, it looks nice for reading PDFs and suchlike, and its not too expensive. So its something I might buy and tote around when Im willing to carry something bigger than my Sony Reader. It would, however, be the first Apple product Id bought since my Apple II.
 
posted by Curt Sampson
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
What really scares me is the fact that in this hype of apps we are
getting into a more controlled and closed door arena of personal
computing. Apple remains the master of the grounds, an innovative cool
app needs the master approval to get in, if it conflicts with apples
interest it gets rejected. The entire distribution will be controlled
by apple. Utilities are what keep a computing device in the market,
apple is very intelligently outsourcing this and controlling the
platform with gates (I applaud facebook for giving developers the
freedom). Slowly apple will introduce a payment system, ad system and
control the whole eco-system, seems like circa 1980s IBM plan. All
innovation is tied up to a cool hardware and we are going nuts about
touchscreen forgetting the fact that intelligent systems need open
platform to innovate. Customer is being locked in the name of visual
design, touch and UI experience. All this hype and we are forgetting to
analyze the danger of this hardware, software all in the hands of one company. This is dangerous
 
posted by Rohit Nallapeta
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
But, for the first time, Ive got a real sinking feeling in my stomach.
 
Good grief. Go get a drink or something. Apples not in business to satisfy your dreams of openness or whatever it is youre prematurely mourning. If you dont like the trend, start your own company and improve on it.
 
Im not blown away by the iPad, but I have been sufficiently impressed with what Apple has accomplished to think they will continue to deliver tools that I want to use. There damn sure isnt anyone else out there doing it as well and as consistenly as Apple.
 
posted by SMC
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
They make a nice pile of money on the App Store by taking a percentage of sales. That explains why theyd extend the App Store model wherever sensible.
 
It wouldnt be sensible to exert App Store-style control over laptops, desktops, and servers, because people who buy those devices expect to be able to accomplish arbitrary tasks with arbitrary software. Apple would have to get pretty dumb to throw away that pile of money.
 
posted by Amitai Schlair
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
Its all about the user experience. Apple wants to make the entire experience as streamlined/pain-free/enjoyable to users as possible. Thats why Apple ranks so high in customer satisfaction surveys. Its probably one of the reasons you like Apple products so much. That being said, the 30% cut from App Store revenue is good profit as well.
 
Regarding the iPad: Today was only the first step.
 
My thoughts on the iPad: http://bit.ly/bIBP1o
 
posted by nik .
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
Hadnt thought about the evil angle, but Im about halfway through the speech right now and youre definitely right about Jobs lack of real enthusiasm for this device. Hes trying to be a good salesman but I dont think hes speaking from conviction. When you lead off your announcement with the ability to change your desktop background and then say things like you can get the whole web page on a single screen isnt that amazing?, youre probably not selling anything too great.
 
Also, watching Jobs peck away with two fingers while trying to type on this thing shows me its not nearly as easy as he says.
 
posted by Mike D.
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
This seems to be a pretty typical reaction to the iPad.  I must be missing something fundamental, here, because I dont understand your reasoning.  Why, exactly, is No Flash or other alternate runtimes, no one-off apps or open source customizations frightening?
 
posted by $mike cremer
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
You are of course entitled to your opinion and thoughts, but I found your whole Apple is evil/taking over the world scenario to be, to put it bluntly, boring.
 
Settle down, and get a grip.  And as someone said, they can only control the segment if everyone chooses the Apple path.  So if you are scared by it, go buy a Microsoft product - they certainly dont have any plans to rule the world/internet/computer market.  Oh yeah
 
posted by Grant
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
Yep, youve got a solid read on the body language here, and of the larger ambition being revealed. The hard part is that I see so many people who know it but wont resist it.
 
posted by Anil
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
First of all, Apples strategy is working. Second of all, its way better that Apple is doing things differently. If you want a more open product, you can get one. It will kind of suck, but thats what you get in an open environment.
 
posted by pwb
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
Same feelings here. I think thats yet another very cool product from Apple but the Store trends is really scary to me. For all the Apple fanboys and members of the Apple cult (am typing this on e a Macbook) commenting one day youll maybe understand that openness is important and that Apple product (OS) would not exist without it (FreeBSD Kernel anyone, Webkit based on KHTML, gcc as the core compiler,  list goes on).
 
Also the we have a bigger one than all the other smart phone makers is really annoying, and the we invented everything is starting to be boring at some point. Too bad someone cannot shut his mouth up sometimes.
 
posted by Benjamin Sergeant
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
People worried as the iPod, and then iPhone, revenue outpaced the Macs that Apple had somehow decided the Macintosh was at the end of its life.
 
I certainly dont have any insider knowledge to prove Apples benevolence, but their claim has always been that the iPod and iPhone are providing a halo effect that leads customers to the Mac. The numbers in the last 10 years certainly agree.
 
Again, there is no proof that the Mac will remain open and standards embracing - and Ill be among the first to leave if the system is unduly locked down - until they make such changes I think it is only fair to trust they will continue making the best computing platform as well.
 
posted by Owen Imholte
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
I dont think Apple will apply the closed model to the Mac or to OSX.  A lot of the developers for the iPhone and Mac are working on Macs.  These people need to be able to install all kinds of experimental stuff and need fairly low-level access to the hardware.  Do you think that Apple really wants all its developers to be working on Linux?
 
posted by Matthew Leifer
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
See Stephen Frys take. I take your point, but its more as an inconvenience. Of course, I can take the hardware (which I couldnt assemble for that kind of money) and put anything I want on it. For most people though, this is great  Apple doesnt control anything most that most people would rather not think about.
 
http://www.stephenfry.com/2010/01/28/ipad-about/
 
posted by Michael Fischer
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
My thoughs exactly. Ive never bought media or apps with DRM, and I wont be starting now either. The DRM really diminish the value of this device, and the apps.
 
If I buy this device itll be for what it does out of the box, not the apps. Unfortunatly, it doesnt sound like it does much out of the box.
 
posted by Michel Fortin
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
I used to lump Apple in a different category than Microsoft. I dont anymore. I dont think they feel the same way about the customer they used to feel. 
http://www.goofywildcat.com/apple-is-evil
 
posted by goofydg1
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
I totally agree with you. Why should I buy a second iPod touch? My one isnt too bad at all.
 
posted by Moritz
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
I dont think Apple will phase out OSX and replace it by iPhone OS. It doesnt do multi tasking and is severely limited in traditional computational tasks.
 
posted by Dan
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
You are right about Jobs monomaniacal need for control, but youre missing his underlying monomaniacal focus on marketing. His aim is to control the experience for the user, which is totally a marketing idea. His aim is not to advance information  or support the communities that sprang up around Apple  scientific and democratic ideals I would like.  Jobs is only a marketer. He gets design, he gets branding, he gets profit margins; he got Woz out of his organization, he ignores all other considerations. Jobs appears to be the quintessential hedgehog.
 
posted by Warren Yoder
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
i think all these talk of open and close system is a bit mispalced. iPad is not a computer its an appliance like TV , Toaster or Dishwasher . would you like them to be open or would you like them to just work out of the box .
 
much as we want to have open system we are a miniority ..geek minority most ppl dont care for such things . so all this debate is an intellectual excercise only . 
real trouble with iPad is that it fail to make a case why i should prefer it over a iPod touch ? its just an oversized iPod thats it
 
posted by Prashant
 on January 28, 2010 #
 
Wait a second. For the iPhone/iPod touch, 140,000 apps developed and released in 18 months by 3rd party programmers is a closed system? Thats control?  Name one other device in the history of mankind to create such activity? Not to mention the accessory market.
 
Note that the iPad keynote was designed for programmers, really. Apple mentioned that this could lead to the next gold rush - knowing full well that the programming community will get busy.
 
The iPad will certainly get better with later iterations, adding some of those features that everyone is quick to cry and whine about.
 
The iPad isnt a machine to run Garage Band, Photoshop or a web server, though it could run lite versions for the casual user.
 
I dont think enough has been written about Apples new A4 Chip. Finally, Apple is seeing fruits of their PA Semi acquisition. You can only imagine that this chip will move to the iPhone/iPod touch and is just getting started. If I were Intel, NVidia or ATI, Id be worried.
 
Im sure the iPad will be a hit, because the buzz is just too strong. Will it be a slam dunk, or the most important thing Jobs has released? Probably not. But look for the netpad market to explode as others get in the game. But, do you really want a Win 7 tablet? A linux tablet? Who is best positioned in the market to win the marketshare? Apple Inc. thats who.
 
Steves reality distortion field may be less powerful than it was, but theres no denying this device will drive billions of dollars in worldwide sales by the end of the year.
 
posted by joe
 on January 29, 2010 #
 
Jobs lack of enthusiasm unveiling such a long awaited product could be related to his health? This is not the same Jobs that announced the iPhone in 2007
 
posted by Jos
 on January 29, 2010 #
 
My first thoughts about this product before its release, even though I dont mind Apple products, was here we go with another useless product. Then it was released and I thought, cute. But the real questions do revolve around social control and it began from the time Apple wanted us all to wear white earplugs (note: white). I woke up after my first pair broke in less than a year, and Im on a German manufactured pair of earphones that are still going strong.
In other countries, there are issues relating to book publishing rights, and how local authors are affected. So yes, Jobs, like most CEOs is a megalomaniac, but for whose benefit?
 
posted by Anna
 on January 29, 2010 #
 
Before we get too scared about Jobs iron-fisted control of the future, remember that the iPhone taking the world by storm actually amounts to 2-3% of market share, and the Mac at its barnstormer best has managed to inch just north of 10% before falling back to respectable single digits. I think you be hard pressed to find anyone that does things with computers at all replacing a real computer with something like an iPad. For people that dont use computers, iPad will be like Rockband vs music lessons.
 
Honestly, the iPad looks like a TV killer for rich people to me.
 
posted by quinn
 on January 30, 2010 #
 
Apple was not evil before but hard realities (about bankruptcy) and blessing and advice of great Bill Gates must have made them evil empire. Forcing people to buy macs/iphones/ipod for app development and not promising anything in return!!Evil media companies are equal partners here.
Many americans wondered why such a Biblical level earthquake happened in their backyard and they dont need to go further than looking at past few years stock market and financial industry history and American companies greed that wiped out wealth of 90% of common Americans. 
Long live EVIL capitalism.
 
posted by John Park
 on January 31, 2010 #
 
Is Apple evil? I dont know.
 
I do know they dont have anything close to a monopoly at this point. Right now theyre doing what they think is best for their business.
 
If the closed platform really turns people off, they wont buy this thing. Theyll wait for the better version with the more open OS that lets them do what they want.
 
We get a sinking feeling because we cant tinker with the latest gadgets like we used to (without sort of voiding our warranty). But Apple doesnt make products for us (the tinkerers), it makes products for beginners and people who want it to just work. Mr. High-Powered-Traveling CEO and Mrs. Stay-at-Home Mom arent interested in effing around with software installation customizations and port forwarding. They have a task theyre trying to accomplish, and they need the OS to just get out of the way.
 
Is Apples way evil? Not to the end-user. To some developers, probably, to many of us tinkers, possibly. But to the actual target market for this device? Not so much.
 
posted by nic pfost
 on February  1, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January  8, 2010
 
Title: Do It Now
 
A year or two ago, I came up with a brilliant scheme for handling my email. The problem, I decided, was that there was just too much of it. Spam was mixed in with notes from friends along with important things from work and todo items Id written to myself. What I needed to do was go thru and sort it  pick out the really important stuff to handle right away and move the junk to the bottom. So I wrote a little program that would let me go through and sort my email into neat little folders ordered by priority.
 
Well, heres what happened: I sorted all my email, and then I didnt answer any of it. I told myself that I shouldnt answer the unimportant stuff until the important stuff was taken care of, then when I looked at the important stuff it seemed hard, so I decided to go read some blogs first. To this day, all those important emails are just sitting there.
 
Recently, I came up with a really dumb system for handling my email: just do it. Id start at the top of my inbox, answer the most recent email, and move on to the next one. No excuses. No matter what the email at the top was  no matter how difficult or awkward or unimportant, I had to answer it. I couldnt move on to another email and come back to it later. I had to answer the most recent email, no matter what it was.
 
By the end of the day, Id answered a months worth of email.
 
We procrastinate because we are afraid. Were afraid its too much work and that it will drain us. Were afraid well screw it up and get in trouble. Were afraid we dont know how to do it. Were afraid because, well, weve been putting it off forever and every time we put it off it seems a little more fearsome in our minds. Thats why not putting things off is so liberating. Were forced to confront our fears, not let them grow bigger by repeatedly running away. And when we confront them, we find theyre not so scary after all.
 
This doesnt just apply to email, of course  it works for any todo list. But only if you say no to reordering, prioritizing, estimating deadlines, and doing the most important things first. Forget all that. Do it now.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  8, 2010
 
Well, (a) Rands had a post along these lines about clobbering hundreds of bugs, and (ii) using terminal-mode mail with the window always in peripheral view allows me to answer any important message in 45 seconds.
 
posted by Joe Clark
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
Were forced to confront our fears, not let them grow bigger by repeatedly running away.
 
How to do that ? How to convince ourselves to do right stuff on right time ?? This is the point 
 
posted by vahid
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
very true however the counter argument is that if you plow through your list completing items as fast as possible, you may not be completing them in the optimal manner. Thats why we procrastinate on the important emails; because sending a hasty reply could have a large negative cost.
 
The trick is knowing which items you can knock out ASAP and which items require further rumination.
 
Another factor with email is that once it has sat in your inbox for long enough, sending a reply, no matter how well crafted, will seem rude. Therefore email has a inherent lifespan (maybe 2 weeks?). After that you can just delete/archive it with impunity.
 
posted by felix
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
I use gmail, get around 20 emails per day, and I always quickly scan through visually to find and answer the important emails first. Never had a problem with that. Sometimes it could be overwhelming, I agree, but I would still say you need to prioritize rather than moving from one email to another in a linear fashion. (from most recently received first). Some emails can take their time for our answers. Others need immediate replies.
 
posted by Mohan Arun
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
Given that Aaron said:  I wrote a little program that would let me go through and sort my email into neat little folders ordered by priority.
 
Mohan Arun then said:  I would still say you need to prioritize.
 
And the world exploded.
 
posted by Bystander
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
 Id start at the top of my inbox, answer the most recent email, and move on to the next one. No excuses. 
Ive always done it this way. I also immediately throw away mails I know I will never answer or is not needed to act upon.
 
Extremely few mails actually contains information that I might need later - and those that do is often sent to me by myself. Those are saved in folders (ideas, programming, friends etc).
 
posted by Daniel Larsson
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
I think sometimes its better to get the easy stuff done first because it takes not much time and having a few things off your list will give you a feeling of accomplishment. But your mileage will vary depending on the severity of your procrastination habits.
 
posted by Dan
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
um how do you let a months worth of email build up
 
posted by no
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
What you are doing with your inbox is in direct relation to the Getting Things Done methodology by David Allen.  I would recommend you grab his book (called Getting Things Done  obviously) and give it a read.  It may help you figure out a system to make you more productive and less stressed
 
I am biased since I am currently working on a product that helps people with Getting Things Done - especially from a product development point of view (software product).
 
posted by Bryan Rehbein
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
Great wise Buddhist monk once said It is harder to think of doing something than to do it
 
posted by mempko
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
The branding on Just Do It is unfortunate, because it is such an awesome phrase.
 
Caveat on just doing your email: you need to not have your email open all day. Pick a time, and get through it. Let SMS be your interrupt-if-urgent messaging system.
 
posted by Ivan Kirigin
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
I totally agree. I reached this same conclusion myself not too long ago, and it has really made me more productive and focused (as a programmer).
 
Thanks for nicely summing this up :)
 
posted by Randall Degges
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
Who uses email much anymore? I find it weird that in 2010 people still get a lot of email.
 
Ive notice that the number of emails I get has dropped precipitously in the past few years to the point that I only get one or two a day now that are actually looking for a response.   Generally team members communicate via IM.
 
posted by Walter McGrain
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
You discovered the first step to productivity.
 
In 30 years you will discover 5 more and you will be really productive.
 
Or you can read David Allens Getting Things Done: The Art of Stress-Free Productivity and have it all now.
 
It took me 15 years to get there half way (3 steps) and 2 days reading for the full road. Re-inventing the wheel does not pay.
 
posted by CCs
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
My grandmother had a saying: Do it now, then its done which I try to live by. Still, procrastination inevitably rears its head.
 
posted by Scott McMillin
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
Good one. Only thing Id add is that you occasionally cant fully handle an email because it requires more work, or research, or some other dependency in that case best thing to do is forward it to a todo list and then get it out of the email inbox.
 
More on that method, btw, in my book Bit Literacy.
 
posted by Mark Hurst
 on January  9, 2010 #
 
Winners do
 
Whats
Important
Now
 
posted by Casey Drummer
 on January  9, 2010 #
 
work and personal email are different for me.  at work, i have the 3 month rule: i keep 3 months of emails in my inbox, so i can search for stuff, and file a few things that i know i will need later.  then i just dump everything older than 3 months.  i dont email many people for much more than scheduling things and followups.  i use SMS whenever possible for urgent things (system alerts, communications with the boss, etc.)
 
email has no tone of voice, making it prone to mis-understandings and its admissible in court, so you should use it sparingly in a professional setting.
 
my personal email is the opposite.  i use gmail so i just search for stuff, and only delete things like daily automated emails from job search sites or shopping sites.  i dont even delete mailing list traffic.
 
personal and business communications is a tool box.  email is just one tool and it has a proper use.  it is a supplement to, not a substitute for, the phone, SMS, IM, social networking, or a face to face conversation.
 
posted by chris
 on January  9, 2010 #
 
I have an even more efficient way to deal with email that I discovered in, admittedly, a moment of severe frustration; just delete them all.  If ever a pile gets so long that I cant even remember when I stopped completing items, Ill delete them all.
 
If the information is truly that important, then either itll be resent in one form or another back to you, or youll eventually be prompted to go out and search for it out of necessity.
 
posted by haig
 on January 12, 2010 #
 
I heard a similar thought-process called FAT File-Act-Trash. You take your queue and for each item you have to do one of those three things.
 
posted by Phil Dhingra
 on January 13, 2010 #
 
To those who are still tempted to use some sort of advanced scheme after reading this post: Yes, advanced schemes can be good, but youre still better off following Aarons advice for a short spell before planning one out.  By doing this you will get a better idea of the sort of problem you are dealing with.  Implementing an advanced scheme for a task you havent done much of or having done in a while is premature optimization.
 
posted by John Maxwell IV
 on January 25, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January  8, 2010
 
Title: Should our cognitive biases have moral weight?
 
In a classic piece of psychology, Kahneman and Tversky ask people what to do about a fatal disease that 600 people have caught. One group is asked whether they would administer a treatment that would definitely save 200 peoples lives or one with a 33% chance of saving 600 people. The other group is asked whether they would administer a treatment under which 400 people would definitely die or one where theres a 33% chance that no one will die.
 
The two questions are the same: saving 600 people means no one will die, saving just 200 means the other 400 will die. But peoples responses were radically different. The vast majority of people chose to save 200 people for sure. But an equally large majority chose to take the chance that no one will die. In other words, just changing how you describe the option  saying that it saves lives rather than saying it leaves people to die  changes which option most people will pick.
 
In the same way that Festinger, et. al. showed that our intuitions are biased by our social situation, Kahneman and Tversky demonstrated that humans suffer from consistent cognitive biases as well. In a whole host of examples, they showed people behaving in a way we wouldnt hesitate to think was irrational  like changing their position on whether to administer a treatment based on what it was called. (I think a similar problem affects our intuitions about killing versus letting die.)
 
This is a major problem for people like Frances Kamm, who think our moral philosophy must rely on our intuitions. If people consistently and repeatedly treat things differently based on what theyre called, are we forced to give that moral weight? Is it OK to administer a treatment when its described as saving people, but not when its described as not saving enough? Surely moral rules should meet some minimal standard of rationality.
 
This problem affects a question close to Kamms work: what she calls the Problem of Distance in Morality (PDM). Kamm says that her intuition consistently finds that moral obligations attach to things that are close to us, but not to thinks that are far away. According to her, if we see a child drowning in a pond and theres a machine nearby which, for a dollar, will scoop him out, were morally obligated to give the machine a dollar. But if the machine is here but the scoop and child are on the other side of the globe, we dont have to put a dollar in the machine.
 
But, just as with how things are called, our intuitions about distance suffer from cognitive biases. Numerous studies have shown that the way we think about things nearby is radically different from the way we think about things far away. In one study, Indiana University students did better on a creativity test when they were told the test was devised by IU students studying in Greece than when they were told it was devised by IU students studying in Indiana.
 
Its a silly example, but it makes the point. If our creativity depends on whether someone mentions Greece or Purdue, its no surprise our answers to moral dilemmas depend on whether they take place in the US or China. But surely these differences have no more moral validity than the ones that result from Tverskys experiment  theyre just an unfortunate quirk of how were wired. Rational reflection  not faulty intuitions  should be the test of a moral theory.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  8, 2010
 
I agree, and have held that belief for a while. However while holding these beliefs Ive run into cases where intuition encapsulates certain nuances rational reflection can miss. Or perhaps more interesting it does a much better job encapsulating definitive human drives for community, survival and cooperation.
 
The intuition to give relatively more moral on things close to you is one force that keeps communities together, and it could be argued these local communities are essential to the human condition.
 
I dont have the best words to describe this, but if youll allow me to wave my hands a bit: many mostly internally consistent and rational world views wont properly explain the odd drives and wants of the human mind. They start to break down as you get close to it. If the rational world view you hold is fiercely conflicting with lots of human intuition, maybe its not taking the right axioms on as its base.
 
posted by Alex G
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
You should be interested in exploring LeDouxs work on emotions (particularly fear) and amygdala. Heres a relevant passage (quoted from a site that is currently down):
 

The most significant of LeDoux experimentation with regard to fear is that the sensory input to the brain is split at the thalamus into two streams  one to the amygdala and one to the neo-cortex. The input stream to the amygdala is quicker  12 milliseconds as opposed to 25 milliseconds to the neo-cortex. Less information goes to the amygdala quicker  it operates as a quick scan to check for danger

 
Feelings come prior to thoughts. No wonder intuitions/feelings have greater hold on us today?
 
Curiously this blog post had no mention of the word feeling or emotion (the word cognition typically excludes affection which - for various reasons - does not attract so much scientific attention).
 
posted by srid
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
No one in the study you described actually changed their position based on the question. Rather, different questions were posed to different groups. A subtle difference, but it points to a larger issue: intuition doesnt necessarily lead to irrational conclusions. Quite often, intuitions conclusions are exactly the same as those rational reflection would suggest.
 
Your title question, should our cognitive biases have moral weight? seems to have become conflated with a very different question: should our cognitive biases have more moral weight than our rational reflection? Answering no to the latter doesnt really give us an answer to the former.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
Hmm a little far fetched and hurried conclusionFor a couple of reasons: 
1.None of these studies have setup a situation of where the subjects can do the so called rational reflection 
Till here it has been assumed. both what is rational reflection and what it takes for a human to reflect rationally b4 making a decision.
 
P.S: Forgive me if i appear to be adopting a condescending tone.. I dont intend to..
 
posted by Anand Jeyahar
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
Aaron -
 
I think the Kahneman and Tversky example is flawed, because wrong choices here do not stem from errors in moral intuition, but rather from errors in our ability to handle probabilities.
 
It is not that people here are not trying to be rational, it is just that they are not terribly good at it in situations that involve assessing probabilistic outcomes.
 
Tom
 
posted by Tom
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
Its definitely hard to know what to do with intuitions.  I think theres an interesting paradox here; we have unreliable intuitions, so we rightly shy away from moral intuitionism, but we also have unreliable calculation of moral terms, especially when rushed, which should lead us a little way back towards acting on a set of intuitions and principles.  (But not the deontological kind of principle.)
 
I think even the least-intuitionist person  say, a utilitarian, cognitivist, naturalist  is likely to end up answering a question like Should I steal from this person? with Well, Im opposed to that generally, so if I think I should then maybe something weirds going on and I should think about it more...
 
So, I think such a strong rejection of intuitions might be a little hasty.  Id love to read more about how we could properly use principles and intuition inside consequentialism, if anyone knows of further reading..
 
posted by Chris Ball
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
You worded it poorly. If 400 people will definitely die, that implies 200 might not die. Not that 200 people will definitely live.
 
posted by matt
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
I think Matt is right, there is something wrong with your wording here. Your first statement implies that 200 or more will survive whereas your supposedly equivalent third statement implies that up to 200 will survive.
 
posted by engels
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
Searching for cognitive and oral is different than searching for cognitive and moral. (Broken key on laptop and searching GReader for post after passing over it.
 
Interesting how many hits for cognitive and moral besides your post.
 
posted by jcwinnie
 on January 10, 2010 #
 
Problem of Distance is not just a phenomenon influencing morality, but all decisions.  In the Kamm example, the machine being close by eliminates the problem of physical effort, but the psychological effort of thinking about events occurring outside my immediate circle of interest (not necessarily influence) increases cognitive load, and we conserve mental energy just as we conserve physical energy.
 
Failure to conserve mental energy results in mental failure modes such as (pathological) anxiety and clinical depression, increasingly common in society.  Its cliche to depict the clinically depressed individual as being so overly affected by events outside their immediate concern that they become literally stuck in their own lives, and part of their therapy is to learn how to become more selfish and think about their own happiness more (and thinking about other peoples problems less) without guilt.
 
What Im getting at is that rational reflection, moral or otherwise, is costly, and in so far as making people more rational/moral/intelligent, it would probably be best to attack the problem from the perspective of thought as scarce units of mental currency and developing efficient means of allocating these units for the greatest good.  A utilitarian augmented intelligence system if you will.
 
posted by haig
 on January 12, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January  3, 2010
 
Title: A Backup Solution?
 
For years Ive wanted a backup solution that just works. (Heres a blog post from 2006 asking for it.) The recent Coding Horror disaster got me thinking that this year I should take another look.
 
There have been some great strides in backup software in recent years. For Unix, theres rdiff-backup , duplicity, brackup, and tarsnap. For Macs, theres Time Machine (which doesnt support remote backups), BackBlaze, Mozy, and Carbonite (which dont do full-disk backups). None of them seem to just work.
 
It seems amazing to me how bandwidth and disk drives have gotten huge in recent years, while backup software has gotten more conservative and efficiency-obsessed. If you want to make regular copies of your entire disk, the best program is still old-fashioned dump, a program written in the era of tape drives. All the state-of-the-art stuff is designed to run on particular folders.
 
But then I found CrashPlan. For $100, you can back up all your machines to it as often as you like. The installation process is super-simple, it runs in the background without killing your net connection (BackBlaze would always slow my machine and my network down), and it works on Macs as well as Unix. It even makes it easy to control remote headless servers  just open an SSH tunnel to the machine you want to configure and you can use your local client to configure the remote machine.
 
The only trouble is that it doesnt support bare-metal restores or xattr. I dont understand why and hope thatll be fixed.
 
Does anyone know of a better solution?
 
Update: Everyone hates Mozy. SpiderOak seems interesting, but is even less designed for full-disk backup.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  3, 2010
 
Not sure if its comparable or what youre looking for but have you looked into Mozy?
 
posted by Mike
 on January  3, 2010 #
 
FYI: Time Machine just works.
 
posted by Srgio Nunes
 on January  3, 2010 #
 
I would agree that Time Machine just works. For full disk backup on the Mac, SuperDuper is the way to go.
 
posted by Hendrik
 on January  3, 2010 #
 
Oh, and I finally uninstalled Mozy a few months into the yearly subscription I paid for. My advice: stay away.
 
posted by Hendrik
 on January  3, 2010 #
 
Mozy is awful; stay away is right.
 
posted by Brian
 on January  3, 2010 #
 
Whats wrong with Tarsnap, aside from (a) needing an explicit exclude /proc until I release the next version, and (b) not being shipped with a cron job?
 
posted by Colin Percival
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
Arq Backup is backup for the Mac that just works, and seems to meet all your 2006 posts criteria.
It backs up your stuff to your own Amazon S3 account, so you dont have to worry about a startup disappearing with your backups.
You give it a size limit and it thins old backups similar to the way Time Machine does, deleting the oldest backups to stay within the limit.
It has bandwidth throttling.
It backs up every single piece of Mac metadata, passing all backup-bouncer tests (http://www.n8gray.org/code/backup-bouncer/).
Get it at http://www.haystacksoftware.com/arq/
 
But its online backup. If you wanted just local (external-disk) backup, Time Machine works fine. It doesnt pass all the backup-bouncer tests, but the ones it fails (restoring hard links, devices and FIFOs) may not matter for you.
 
posted by Stefan
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
I used Mozy for a while on the PC, then for a while on the Mac, and finally gave up. Too much system load, often when there isnt a backup running. Lots of preparing in which it appears to pointlessly store encrypted data as temp files prior to transferring. Software fails in stupid ways from time to time. Not recommended.
 
posted by Kyle Cordes
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
I love CrashPlan.  I have been using it for ~3 months on mac to backup my drobo - it is the only s/w that backs up external drives AND doesnt delete the data if the external drive goes away.
 
I paid $125 for a 3 year plan for one computer, worth the price.
 
posted by Anand Sankaran
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
I just ran into the same issue on my Mac - I wanted very reliable backups. I also chose CrashPlan for my incremental (non-OS) backups after having been a Mozy user since their beta. Mozy had become totally unreliable for me. CrashPlan just works a lot better.
 
As for OS-level backups, I take a weekly image to an external drive using SuperDuper. I have a current image as well as a base re-install image. Both are bootable, and SuperDuper refreshes the current without any intervention.
 
I setup my mom recently, and instead of SuperDuper, I used Carbon Copy Cloner for her Mac. It seems to work just as well as SuperDuper, but its free. On the other hand, I dont have a few years of success with it, so YMMV.
 
posted by Dave
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
Hybir Backup is interessting. It is windows only for now. It supports full backups and bare metal restores and has some unique performance advantages. Check out the screen casts here:
 
http://www.hybir.com/Action/HybirBackupAction.html
 
posted by Rasch
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
MozyHome works pretty well for me  on both Mac and Windows. If you ever need it, their 2nd level support is good.
 
Use the following link to get 20% more space (512 Mb) on a free MozyHome 2 Gb account:
 
https://mozy.com/?code=D685JF
 
posted by ChiliPepr
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
Call me a crochety old man, but cloud backup just seems to compound ones oh-frak-my-disk-crashed problems. Call me when network bandwidth has caught up to, say, Firewire, and I can boot my local machine from the cloud image.
 
After some close calls with a more conservative system, I decided to stop screwing around: I use SuperDuper, a Voyager Q, and three 1.5TB Hitachi drives ($99 each) in rotation. One is always at work, and the other always at home. I back up all my computers to those drives.
 
SuperDuper is.
 
posted by Clay Bridges
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
There is another option to backup data to cloud storage powered by Amazon S3. Check out CloudBerry Backup http://cloudberrydrive.com/ . It is one time fee and the rest what you pay for Amazon S3
 
posted by Andy
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
I too have longed for a backup system that simply worked. I have found it in BackupPC, a Linux package available for most distros.
 
It uses rsync to work its flawless magic. It will manage snapshots for you and allow you to archive them to a portable drive. I use this feature once a week to write snapshots off to an encrypted disk partition and store it at my neighbors house for DR.
 
Recovery is a point and click no brainer via its web interface. Works every time Ive needed it.
 
posted by Julian Tosh
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
I have been using Jungle Disk (http://www.jungledisk.com) for quite awhile and I really like it. It uses S3 and there are Mac, PC, and Linux versions. They have worked a lot of the bugs out and it is really nice. You can set it to run late at night/early in the morning too.
 
I also think Crash Plan is pretty good too but I scripted a simpler version of it using RSync and have been using that for quite a while locally.
 
posted by John Seals
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
I had a bad experience with Mozy. Im currently using a program I wrote myself. It compares disk A with disk B and changes disk B to match disk A. My PC has 2 disks of the same size and the 2nd acts as a backup of the first. How well does it work? I actually dont know because I havent had a hard drive crash since I started this. But theoretically if my main hard disk crashed, I could swap in the 2nd disk, and boot up.
 
posted by Wayne
 on January  5, 2010 #
 
My (debian linux) server uses duplicity to back itself up to S3.  A copy of the necessary ssh and PGP keys is on an SD card in a folder in my files.
 
My (ubuntu) laptop backs itself up to SpiderOak(.com) using their tools (which are updated via an ubuntu repo like the rest of the OS).  Cheaper than CrashPlan, it sounds like, but also available to restore with just a username/password (stored in hardcopy in my wallet).  Also does folder-sync between multiple machines and dropbox kinds of things.
 
I havent had to think about backups in a couple of years.
 
posted by pjz
 on January  5, 2010 #
 
Im also a current user of JungleDisk, their biggest advantages:
 
simple backup combined with network drive
 
Allows S3 or Rackspace storage
 
Im thinking on moving to SpiderOak if they go open source. Ive written my own take on desktop backup here:
http://shmichael.com/2009/12/desktop-backup-traditional-and-torrent-like/
 
posted by Michael Shynar
 on January  6, 2010 #
 
JungleDisk used to be awesome, but now has a $2/mo because we can fee whereas you used to just pay Amazon for the storage on S3.
 
posted by eyafb
 on January  6, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January  3, 2010
 
Title: 2009 Review of Books
 
Well, its time for my annual look back thru the books I read this year. (Previously: 2006, 2007, 2008.) Ive included links to reviews, where I have them, and italicized the titles of the books I recommend without reservation.
 
On Writing Well (3)
 
This book is really dreadful, mostly because the author actually cannot write well.
 
The Power Broker (5)
 
I cannot possibly say enough good things about this book. Go read it. Right now. Yes, I know its long, but trust me, youll wish it was longer. I think it may be simply the best nonfiction book.
 
On Directing Film (4)
 
Not just a great book about directing, but a great book about writing.
 
The Sources of Social Power, Vol. 2
 
Not an easy book, but Michael Mann continues to amaze.
 
The Social Life of Small Urban Spaces
 
If Feynman was a sociologist, this is probably the book hed write. A delightful little thing.
 
American Apartheid
 
This book is criminally under-publicized. Everyone has their own crazy theories about why it is that blacks are disadvantaged in our society. Massey and Denton show its much more obvious than any of that: theyre victims of extreme segregation, with all the negative effects that entails. An absolutely brilliant book.
 
The Path to Power
 
After you finish The Power Broker, if you want more, read this.
 
The Liberal Defence of Murder
 
This book is like a little miracle. Im not even sure how to describe it, except to say that it turns ones understanding of history completely upside-down.
 
Categorically Unequal
 
If youre interested in inequality, this little overview is the place to start.
 
The Fox and the Hedgehog
 
Absolutely delightful.
 
Angler
 
Great introduction to how to use the bureaucracy and Cheneys utter deviousness.
 
Showdown at Gucci Gulch
 
Best book Ive found on how positive bills actually get passed.
 
Reason & Persuasion: Three Dialogues by Plato
 
Great fun.
 
Bat Boy: The Musical
 
If you ever get a chance, go see it. Its the greatest musical ever.
 
Bad Samaritans
 
The best introduction to the real issues of globalization and international development.
 
Nemesis
 
A wonderful book for anyone interested in how science is actually done. (chapter 1, chapters 2-4)
 
Gaming the Vote
 
Poundstones really become an amazing writer. While this isnt as good as Fortunes Formula it really is quite fun. Poundstone takes a rather novel tack in making the argument for voting system reform. Instead of saying that it will allow for third-parties to get a fair hearing, he argues it will protect the major parties from the insidious effect of spoilers.
 
Furthermore, instead of IRV, Approval, or even Condorcet voting, he endorses Range Voting as the best voting system, arguing against Condorcet on some weird grounds about determinant ballots that just doesnt make sense to me (p. 226).
 
Both of these seem reasonable when Poundstone lays them out, but are totally insane upon further inspection. Voting reform may protect against spoilers in the short-term, but in the long term itll likely doom us to some kind of fractured multiparty system. (Thats not to say its a bad thing.) And range voting, like its proponents, is totally batshit insane. (He even passes on their ridiculous claims about it being better than democracy with a straight face.)
 
Lets think about this for a second. Strategic voting with a range ballot (which even range votings proponents say theyll do) is simply approval voting (plus maybe some meaningless nursery effect  if you want that, just have a nonbinding approval box or something). So for the system to work, it depends on people voting astrategically. But obviously those peoples votes will count less than strategic votes. So range votings only advantage over approval voting is that it counts the votes of naive voters less. How is that fair?
 
I think the Range Voting comparison with Condorcet is rigged; youll notice they never provide any explanation for why their supposedly strategic Condorcet behavior is actually strategic. And the only strategic Condorcet behavior Poundstone provides is trying to create a tie to force it into sequential dropping, which seems wildly implausible in a real-life scenario. So it still seems Condorcet outperforms them all.
 
If Youre an Egalitarian, How Come Youre So Rich?
 
I really enjoyed this book. It starts with a simple thought experiment: imagine you had a long-lost identical twin who grew up in a conservative home and became a conservative. You, by contrast, grew up in a liberal home and became a liberal. Wouldnt meeting him make you question your beliefs? And thus, shouldnt the possibility that you could meet him make you question your beliefs? (Im not totally convinced by this; my beliefs are much more shaken by converts  people who were strong believers in X but converted to believing in Y.)
 
From this, Cohen heads to a reminiscence of his own upbringing, which I found especially touching, perhaps because he has the identity I wish I had: a Canadian communist in an antireligious Yiddish-speaking home. In the middle theres a good bit on Hegel, Marx, and why not to heighten the contradictions, and he concludes by refuting Rawls with the same argument Matt Yglesias used on Kent Conrad: Rawls says that in a just society, everyone would embrace the Difference Principle, but the Difference Principle allows for differences because some people will work harder if they get more, but if those people embrace the principle then why wouldnt they give their money to the poor and embrace egalitarianism? He ends by addressing the title question and accepting a sort of Yglesian approach to politics: an overriding concern with the structure of political institutions, but also a strong sense of moral demands for people to achieve they best they can within existing structures.
 
Finally, it got me wondering: a lot of Marx (and, I would add, Keynes) thinks about the future as some sort of society where industrial products give us abundance and economic laws loosen their hold on us. The industrial revolution didnt do that, but perhaps the post-scarcity technological future might?
 
And my first book of the new year is Daniel Ellsbergs Secrets, which Im already loving.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  3, 2010
 
How much time do you spend on reading? Thats a book every 2.765 days for a year, which is impressive to say the least! Glancing at the archives it doesnt seem like this is abnormal for you.
 
posted by Christine
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
Your comparison between Score Voting (aka Range Voting) and Approval Voting incorrectly asserts that Score Voting users have to be astrategic in order for it to work. Thats not the case. Score Voting achieves lower Bayesian Regret than Approval Voting with each additional expressive (sincerely expressive, or astrategic) voter.
http://scorevoting.net/UniqBest.html
 
Further, you basically assert that only naive voters would want to be expressive. But exit polling from the 2000 USA Presidential election shows that about 10% of the Nader supporters who came to the polls actually voted for Nader. Surely they didnt do that because they were unaware they were throwing away their votes. They WANTED to express their preference for Nader.
 
If 10% of Score Voting users are expressive, then they are better off with Score Voting with Approval Voting, because it lets them do what they prefer to do  express themselves. And the strategic voters are better off because their average satisfaction goes up appreciably (the more sincere voters, the lower the Bayesian Regret).
 
As for the truly naive voters that you worry may be disadvantaged by Score Voting, relative to Approval Voting, I would argue that
 
A) They are a negligible fraction of voters, and to give up the substantial benefits of Score Voting to protect them is not reasonable.
 
B) They are quite possibly BETTER with Score Voting, because if they are that naive, then a sincere Score Voting ballot is probably MORE STRATEGIC for them than a sincere Approval Voting ballot. That may sound counter-intuitive, but I think I make a pretty reasonable argument toward that end, here:
http://scorevoting.net/RVstrat6.html
 
As for Condorcet methods, Poundstone does indeed explain how burial strategy can be effective. In short, the voter buries all the front-runners but his favorite among them. For most Condorcet methods, this strategy IS effective, as shown here with statistical analysis:
 
http://scorevoting.net/CondBurial.html
 
The fact that you consider the success of that strategy to be wildly implausible demonstrates a bit of electoral naivete. It is certainly implausible that a voter who prefers Ralph Nader can ensure that Gore defeats Bush, by insincerely switching his vote from Nader to Gore. The odds that it will make the difference are virtually nil. Yet we know quite well that the vast majority of plurality voters use that very tactic.
 
And empirical data (from e.g. decades worth of IRV elections in Australia) shows that most voters using a ranked system will just bury the strongest challengers to their favorite front-runner, even if they are blissfully unaware of the mathematics of the voting method. They just intuit that it makes sense to maximally damage strong opponents. That voters do this is just empirical fact.
 
And this type of naive burial strategy is extremely harmful in Condorcet systems. Whereas this strategy is NOT very harmful in Score Voting, because Score Voting passes the Favorite Betrayal Criterion and the NESD property.
 
http://scorevoting.net/FBCsurvey.html
http://scorevoting.net/NESD.html
 
You can dismiss Score Voting advocates as being merely crazy, but we believe the evidence strongly supports our viewpoint. We further have experienced that virtually all opponents of Score Voting overlook the same things you have overlooked here, or asserts that we havent proven what we say we have (as you did with Poundstone, even though he showed simple examples of how Condorcet burial strategies work, right there in his book).
 
Clay Shentrup
San Francisco, CA
206 801 0484
 
posted by Clay Shentrup
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
If you enjoy film books I recommend Sydney Lumets book. Without reservation.
 
http://www.amazon.com/Making-Movies-Sidney-Lumet/dp/0679756604
 
posted by Tommi
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
The interesting thing about this list is that it doesnt have a single book on it that I also read this year  wait a minute, yes it does! Outliers by Malcolm Gladwell. I didnt want to read a book, but a friend of mine told me I HAD to read it. I said no but he kept insisting. Finally he shoved it into my hands. It was Typical Gladwell  a few simple yet clever ideas explained by laboriously long-winded stories. I hate it  I just dont have the patience for that. But, apparently this is what people like to read, because Gladwell is one of the countrys most popular authors.
 
posted by Wayne
 on January  5, 2010 #
 
I was just about to ask the same question - 2.5 books a week. How many hours are you spending reading?
 
posted by Steven Klassen
 on January  6, 2010 #
 
The average person spends 1704 hours a year watching TV. If the
average reading rate is 250 words per minute and the average book is
180,000 words then thats 142 books a year. So I guess the answer is:
not enough.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January  6, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: December 30, 2009
 
Title: Against Reflective Equilibrium (or, What is ethics for?)
 
Imagine you were an early settler of what is now the United States. It seems likely you would have killed native Americans. After all, your parents killed them, your siblings killed them, your friends killed them, the leaders of the community killed them, the President killed them. Chances are, you would have killed them too, and you probably wouldnt have seen anything wrong with this.
 
Indeed, it probably wouldnt even have occurred to you to think about the morality of this. If you did, it would probably seem just. They were trying to kill you! And your family! Going after them was just self-defense! (It wasnt, of course; you invaded their land.)
 
Or if you see nothing wrong with killing native Americans, take the example of slavery. Again, everyone had slaves and probably didnt think too much about the morality of it. That was just the way the world was. If you were asked about the big moral questions you faced, youd probably think of things like the proper time to pay back a loan, or lying to your wife, or maybe a childs duty of obedience to their father.
 
Today, looking back on people who murder native American and keep slaves, those seem like comparatively small potatoes. Sure, we justify it by saying that they were just people of their time, but still Its hard to get over the fact that George Washington ordered his general to lay waste all the settlements aroundthat the country may not be merely overrun, but destroyed. (He also ordered that they not listen to any overture of peace before the total ruin of their settlements is effected. Our future security will be inthe terror with which the severity of the chastisement they receive will inspire them.) It somehow colors everything he says. Whatever he may have thought about loan repayment or lying, slavery was the big moral question of his time, and (in practice, at least) he got it wrong.
 
We dont kill native Americans much these days and we dont keep slaves, but its hard to believe that our era must be morally perfect. Surely if people back then could make such huge moral blunders, we could be making similar ones right now. And ethical philosophy is useless if it cant help us avoid such huge mistakes.
 
Some people suggest that the way to do ethical philosophy is to listen to our intuitions. I do not think our intuitions about cases are less reliable than those about principles, Frances Kamm argues.
 
But of course our intuitions about cases are less reliable! If we could simply trust our intuitions, we wouldnt need ethical philosophy at all. If something was wrong, we would just know it was wrong. There would be nothing philosophy could tell us.
 
Obviously this is absurd. Lots of people do things that seem clearly unethical while thinking theyre in the right. Perhaps Kamm thinks these mistakes are merely the result of temporary passions and that from her desk at Harvard she can consider such question with a more objective eye.
 
But, as I have shown, peoples intuitions about cases are systematically distorted. Sitting at a desk wasnt enough to persuade George Washington to stop killing native Americans. His mistake wasnt the result of some momentary passion, but of an entire culture that had normalized mass murder and a society that depended on it. To think that he would just suddenly sit down and go Hmm, murdering Indians feels wrong to me is ridiculous. The only way he would possibly conclude that is by taking seriously his principles.
 
I grew up eating animals. I saw nothing wrong with this. My parents ate them, my siblings ate them, my friends ate them, people on TV ate them, the President ate them. I doubt I stopped to think about the morality of eating animals any more than I stopped to think about the morality of brushing my teeth. If you asked me for my intuition, I would have said eating animals was just fine. It was only when I stopped eating animals that my intuitions began to change.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 30, 2009
 
Have you seen the recent NYT article on plant defenses against being eaten? What, exactly, is your ethical line - a nervous system? Some plants certainly have that. Admittedly they dont have brains, but insect brains might be considered middle of the road - are crickets fair game? What about crustaceans?
 
Im somewhat more sympathetic to those who draw the line at mammals - the neocortex seems likely to be responsible for much of what we consider human thought, and it is common among all mammals, albeit much larger in humans.
 
And considering the obscene amount of painful, drawn-out meat eating in the animal world - accurately described in The Greatest Show on Earth as beyond all decent contemplation - how is conservationism compatible with vegetarianism?
 
posted by Devil's Advocate
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
Devils A,
 
I feel like harm reduction is a valid approach to dietary and lifestyle choices. It seems to me that the big morality question with eating animals might not so much be What is it okay to kill, unnecessary, and how should we order those priorities? but rather If we eat animals, can everyone eat?
 
My intuition (sorry Aaron) is that its unreasonable to continue to eat animals and maintain ones current lifestyle when faced with this sort of question, because youre not quite sure if you can eat bees or really, really, really cool plants that scream or whatever else. Its that the default mode should be one of inactivity rather than preserving whatever currently exists. I guess Im saying, wouldnt it be a bummer to keep killing the aboriginal population while figuring out of its okay to do that, and instead wouldnt it make more sense to knock it off for a bit? I suppose the analogy benefits from no one really wanting to kill Indians any longer.
 
My own approach as a vegan is that that Im probably still not doing the best job I could be, but that rather its important to internalize certain behaviors or visions of the world, and then the expression of those visions will hopefully exist through my actions.
 
So, it seems like theres a huge issue to tackle when it comes to the sustainability of meat production and consumption, and then you actually have to factor in that youre eating animals, which like Aaron hinted at, just starts to seem bizarre after being away from it for any period of time.
 
posted by christopherbdnk
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
Youre absolutely right.  You need ethical philosophy to protect you from your newly developing incorrect intuition that you shouldnt eat animals.
 
posted by Lawrence
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
Interesting, I have been thinking about meat eating recently. I live in berkeley, home of many vegans. More then, 50% of my friends are vegan, some of whom have banned, not kidding - banned, me from eating meat in their homes. If this is the way things are going how can I think that meat eating is still okay?
 
First, I dont think that most meat processing is okay. I try really hard to source good meat, well processed meat. I think the Temple Grandin, is pointing a way to properly processed meat, but more then that, how do I get the most out of, say a cow. I think to do justice to meat, you need to use it for all its worth.
 
I realize that the more we live as individuals, the more a vegan lifestyle means something.  its hard to properly use meat when you only use it as an individual, or even as an individual family.
 
I think though, if we were  to band together in semi-large groups we could properly use meat to the fullest extent, and bonus points if we can sustainable live.
 
I think it might be a mistake to equate the life of a cow, with that of a human.
 
posted by Alex Kessinger
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
You are talking only about food.
 
But what about ethics of system when one is sending his children to institution where they are programming him to become part of the system (as his father whom by sending him, did his part in the system, and didnt see anything wrong with it), not learning to become better individual, but deforming him.
 
Or ethics of system where work is prayed as new god, and one but not participating in it is devils child.
 
Ethics of system where we can see unjustice, but are too afraid to be punished to say something and to stand against it.
 
Or is something ethical about creating a system where we are correcting problems not trying to prevent it. Where doctors are not paid for keeping health people health, but for repairing sick people?
 
posted by _fm
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
Thomas Jefferson did actually think slavery was wrong. He wrote at length about it. His original drafts of the Declaration of Independence admonished the crown for perpetuating slavery (that, and many other parts, got edited out by the other founders). Of course, it did not stop him from keeping slaves, or fathering children with Sally Hemings. What makes Jeffersons actions morally repugnant was this acknowledgement of slaverys wickednessand the fact that he never freed his slaves even in his will after he died.
 
posted by Steve
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
Wasnt expecting that last paragraph no I didnt even see it coming since I was expecting this post to go somewhere & maybe end with an open ended question on what might be considered immoral in the future.
 
I havent been reading your journal for very long having just recently added it to my feed reader, Im not removing it for something like this either, I quite enjoy reading what you write, just not that last paragraph.
 
We dont raise animals on a farm, kill them & then cook their delicious meats so we can not eat them. Its not a moral question either, were omnivores. You cant even compare that to slavery. Civilizations enslaved those their societies didnt like, they did so perhaps because it was economically beneficial or just for status, whatever their reasons its not because its human nature to enslave, it wasnt human nature to build society, but it happened anyway because thats what we were capable of. Were also capable of not eating meat, but its not immoral just because were capable of not doing something.
 
So um yes I am offended that you would consider my food on the same level of enslavement of our own species or the invasions against the Ancient Americans & would seek a conflict on that. I wont force meat down your throat if you & other vegetarians dont turn what I eat into a moral or political issue.
 
posted by Sebastian
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
My guess is it will be materialism, rampant consumerism, trash, pollution, that sort of thing which humans will look back on as what were they thinking?   Not eating animals.
 
The reason is eating animals is built into our species, its part of our evolution.  Theres a moral problem in how we treat the animals we are eating, but the concept of eating animals is key to who we are biologically.
 
Trash, consumerism, etc. is not, however.  Its humans perverting the natural order of things.
 
posted by Jim Gilliam
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
Perhaps the lack of meat has affected the quality of your thought process for this is the worst articles Ive seen from you.  I normally enjoy your writing but you just didnt think this out man.  Jefferson was a bad example as is eating meat of a modern day example.
 
Eating animals is not morally comparable to enslaving an/or killing humans, not even close.  If youd have said not allowing gay marriage, or not allowing atheists to run for public office youd have valid modern day examples of things most people do that are simply wrong without giving it too much thought.
 
Eating meat youll need to make a much better argument than that.  Youd didnt even make an argument for why eating plants is more moral than eating meat, which I dont think is true, but you should have at least tried if thats the position youre trying to support.
 
posted by Ramon
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
In response to Steve, Ive changed my example from Jefferson and slaves to Washington and native Americans, where I believe the history to be much clearer.
 
Ramon is correct that this piece isnt arguing that eating meat is wrong. People are so touchy when their morally dodgy practices are questioned! Its just an obvious example of a widespread behavior that people give little moral scrutiny to. (And saying that we shouldnt scrutinize it because its human nature is ridiculous. Rape and war are human nature too.)
 
Im open to other examples, but I think Jims suggestion of consumerism/pollution is even more controversial and harder to explain. But I hope to tackle it in the next piece.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
I dont doubt ethical principles are important, but this is a pretty awful argument for them. Youre, ironically, relying on your own intuition here to say intuition is unreliable. You havent supported the idea that intuition wasnt enough in your historical examples; stating that idea as if it were fact doesnt make it so. Your initial example was even demonstrably false. Switching to an example without evidence of being false just makes it more difficult to prove false; that doesnt make it true.
 
Ive been vegetarian for 13 years now and it still hasnt changed my intuition that I dont personally need to eat meat though others might. Varying my diet has demonstrated the former and looking at my teeth demonstrates the latter. No ethical principles were necessary here.
 
Id really like to see where ethical principles are actually important. This isnt it.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
As your first commenter mentions, the consequences of not eating meat are not at all necessarily superior to the status quo, or less ethically problematic.
 
Many of your commenters, however, are arguing that since were omnivores by nature that therefore eating meat is ok.  Its natural.
 
Human progress can be seen as creating institutions that restrain our nature.  The murder rates in hunter-gatherer societies start at the rate of Detroit and go up from there.  And do you need to ask what the life of the typical woman is like in such societies?
 
Natural is not a virtue, its a neutral fact, and identifying something as natural is in no way a good argument for ethical superiority.  In fact its good reason to be suspicious.
 
posted by Steve C
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
In the future, it may be possible to eat meat without eating an animal. See http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/science/article6936352.ece
 
posted by Wayne
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
Ive always wondered - vegans cant use leather because its the skin of a dead animal.  Can they drive cars or fly in planes which run on liquefied animal remains?  Or is there a statute of limitations on when it becomes morally OK to use an animal product?  1 year = morally wrong, 1 billion years = OK now.
 
Furthermore: If eating meat truly is tantamount to the evils of genocide and slavery as you state, what can you say for yourself that you daily interact with, do business with, support, aid and earn money from these people?  Is not supporting evil as repugnant as participating?
 
If you do not refuse to shake hands with your grocer, doctor or lawyer - maybe, your intuition tells you that eating meat really isnt the same as mass-murder.
 
posted by nathan
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
On the more general subject of different time periods different morals, and how ours is no different, see this outstanding essay What You Cant Say by Paul Graham: http://www.paulgraham.com/say.html
And his follow-up at http://www.paulgraham.com/resay.html
 
posted by Wayne
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
Steve -
 
Absolutely, hence his famous wolf by the ear quote.  He recognised the injustice of slavery but also weighed self-preservation into the equation.  Not that this is a defence of course, but it does how that Jeffersons intuition regarding the morality of slavery was correct.
 
Aaron -
 
I would like to see you engage a bit more directly with Kamms point regarding the reliability of case intuition vs. principle intuition.  You reject the point but dont seem to offer a compelling argument against it.
 
Tom
 
posted by Tom
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
Aaron, I think your last paragraph illustrates the very dangers of moral intuitions that you so persuasively warn us about. Now you are a vegetarian, with vegetarian friends and so on. Of course your intuitions will change powerfully, almost beyond rational control, and you should critically examine this process as it is happening.
 
For example, consider that mass agriculture is destroying the planets topsoil and is carbon-intensive. When you buy tofu, rice, wheat, beans, potatoes, etc., you are responsible for this damage. Also you are directly responsible for the deaths of many little animals who, in the cultivation and harvesting of your share, are dismembered and crushed by tractors and combines (though those deaths are fairly invisible to us, and nobody cares about snakes, mice, moles, etc).
 
Or, you could occasionally buy, butcher  (or have butchered) and eat a pastured cow who walked around eating grass (say 600lbs hanging weight)  making you responsible for one or two killings per year, and much less environmental harm.
 
posted by Ben B.
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
Ben B., are those your actual food choices? That seems really unlikely, not relevant to most of us. It could still be relevant to you, of course. Thats the thing about food: its so inherently local that ethics around it cant often be applied universally.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on December 30, 2009 #
 
Brian, actually I take Aarons point about cases vs. principles to mean that what seems personally or locally relevant (or likely, or easy, or plausible, or practical) should not be relied on at all for ethical reasoning, and that we actually should look for universals.
 
Im asking you to consider two propositions (1) vegetarians, by eating, kill animals and harm the environment, and (2) we could at least consider eating animals as a way to reduce killing and harming.
 
And then Im suggesting that those propositions can be used to shine a critical light (of the kind Aaron wants us to use, I think) on the moral intuition of his last sentence: the intuition (if I read  him right) that there is something specially unethical about eating animals as a case of killing animals
 
posted by Ben B.
 on December 31, 2009 #
 
Sorry, I was thinking Scott but wrote Brian. -Ben
 
posted by Ben B.
 on December 31, 2009 #
 
Im going to be a party-pooper and pull you guys out of the philo-moral questions about food for a second
 
Aaron - Why is self-preservation  not a defense. Because the strong end up on top and the group that doesnt is the victim? By definition this is the nature of a conflict rooted in genuine fear. The stronger side do not fear any less than the weaker side. You can argue that they have no reason to fear. Or that - being stronger - they have a moral obligation towards the weak. But (a) they dont always know they are stronger, right from the start and (b) they are driven by a survival instinct which, like faith, cant be rationalized.
 
Self preservation is a relevant and much-used defense today in regions of conflict outside the US - where the sides to the conflict genuinely feel their survival is at stake.
 
And unless youve been part of such a conflict yourself - not as a tourist or journalist, or bystander of any other sort, but as a soldier/gun-man/freedom-fighter with a gun in your hand facing another soldier/gun-man/freedom-fighter with a gun in his hand(Afghanistan, Gaza, Serbia, Bosnia?) you are doing what you claim Kamm does when from her desk at Harvard she can consider such question with a more objective eye.
 
There is nothing moral about wars. No war is justified. No killing is moral. Saying it makes us masters-of-the-obvious.
 
History gives us the privilege of retro-and-introspective contemplation, but this should not exclude contextualization from the moral-equation. Which is why - they were just people of their time is a justification. And the implication is that morality is elastic (and dynamic), and can be stretched or not depending on reality.
 
posted by ag
 on December 31, 2009 #
 
How many people really killed native americans or owned slaves? Its probably very few who killed native americans, and with civilians almost only in self defense. I know none of my ancestors owned slave plantations and I doubt many peoples did.
 
I do wonder about the morality of eating animals, but at the same time its a hard world. Its easier said than done to watch your family starve instead of occupying largely empty lands, and if cows and pigs werent raised on farms theyd never live in the first place. Maybe rather than stopping eating meat we should do more to guarantee animals are treated in a more palatable manner while they are alive.
 
posted by Antiguru
 on January  1, 2010 #
 
I think Jim Gilliam hit it on the head with materialism as a central issue. His comment seemed mainly aimed at environmental consequences of consumption which are critically important but perhaps difficult for many people to grasp as a moral issue.
 
My first thought on reading your piece was about the repercussions of our consumption in terms of social justice. I think one of the hardest moral realities for people to face is the human cost of their own lifestyle. Our bananas come from plantations in South America with no labor rights. Our socks are made in Indonesian sweat shops. Our cell phones are made with coltan mined with forced labor in Africa. Nearly everything we consume comes on the backs of people living unenviable lives. The people of the third world are our slaves by corporate proxy.
 
Individually and societally we seem incapable of confronting this reality and owning up to the radical change to how we live that is necessary to reduce the exploitation of people and destruction of our environment.
 
posted by David A.
 on January  2, 2010 #
 
The last paragraph is perfect. It has sparked a modern debate in the comments that probably parallels the debates people had during the killing of  Native Americans and during slavery.
 
By looking at the comments, it looks like people are generally uninterested in unbiased discussion. They start with the premise, I love (or need) meat and then proceed to defend it from there. You can replace meat with land, slavery, fossil fuels, killing Native Americans, or killing Jews and you can see how it all relates.
 
posted by Mauricio Gomes
 on January  4, 2010 #
 
Thanks, nice post.
 
Incidentally, deciding that youre trying to be rational in your ethics doesnt seem to always be a good enough defense against letting yourself be swayed by popularity and tradition; for example, many philosophers have made arguments to justify treating animals badly that are, in retrospect, kind of ridiculous.
 
First, Descartes told us that, although it seemed like the problem of animal suffering was a bit of a problem for Christianity (if God is benevolent and omnipotent, and animals arent descended from Adam and have done nothing wrong, why does he make them suffer?), it was okay because animals were really just machines, and when they act hurt its fake.  We dont believe that anymore.
 
We would expect Kant to come closer to the right idea with an application of the Categorical Imperative, but he made a similar cop-out:  animals cant reason, so they dont have rights, so we can do what we want with them.  You have to get into the 1800s before a philosopher started to strongly consider that we had direct obligations in our treatment of other animals.
 
Im not sure where Im going with this.  I understand that you want us to move away from intuitions, and I agree that we should try to, but its not clear where we can move to.  Principles are a form of intuition, arent they?  And if we adopt principles even though theyre intuitions, we still have to somehow find the right inferences from our principles in just the way that Descartes and Kant failed to so completely regarding animals.
 
I guess Im also curious whether you think the principles we might adopt should be deontological or not; I suspect you dont, but if thats true then were pretty limited in what kind of principles we can have, and how much they can change our considered behavior.
 
posted by Chris Ball
 on January  8, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: December 27, 2009
 
Title: Researcher Job
 
Im looking for a researcher to work with on a couple projects. The research will mostly be into questions of United States government policy and the relevant factual basis. For example, you might be asked to look up things about cap-and-trade legislation and the evidence for anthropogenic global warming. You can do it part-time. You can work from anywhere. I think the work will be interesting and Ill be doing it too. I think the work will be important, which is why Im doing it.
 
The requirements are:
 
generally lefty politics
 
the ability to figure out the answers to complicated and politically controversial questions and find primary sources supporting those answers
 
the ability to write clear summaries of those answers
 
The ideal person is probably someone whos contributed to Wikipedia, but thats not a requirement.
 
If youre interested, send a paragraph you wrote explaining or summarizing something to me@aaronsw.com with researcher in the subject. If you have ideas for how to find people like this, post them in the comments. (Or email them. Whatever.) Ill probably end up hiring a bunch of researchers so the more people and ideas the better.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 27, 2009
 
Id look into finding someone in college policy debate.  Your point #2 is basically what they spend 6 months out of the year doing.
 
posted by Will Chamberlain
 on December 28, 2009 #
 
Aaron,
 
The requirements [for the job youre attempting to fill] are:
 
You do realize that this is quite likely a violation of (much-beloved on the left) federal hiring and employment law, right?
 
jb
 
posted by jb
 on December 28, 2009 #
 
Will Chamberlain is dead on, I came to post about the college policy debate thing as well. They are fairly lefty (generally speaking) and are good at researching the shit out of stuff.
 
posted by Andy Kish
 on December 29, 2009 #
 
The generally lefty politics, whether it violates regulations or not, shows a deeply worrying attitude to science. I have been following your blog for a while, impressed by the thoughts and the clarity you state them, but I find this requirement to be appalling, despite fulfilling it myself. You have answered your question (in the next posting) about todays ethical blunders yourself!
 
posted by Werner Kuhn
 on January  3, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: December 14, 2009
 
Title: Googling for Sociopaths
 
One of the best things about capitalism is the way it handles sociopaths. Major  executives look up to Alexander the Great and apparently try to follow in his footsteps. But instead of leading a murderous campaign across Asia, they decide to make something people want: newspapers and movies and television shows. True, theyre far from perfect, but you have to admit its a lot better than mass slaughter.
 
Many books have been written about Google, even though were all pretty familiar with the company to begin with, but what makes Ken Aulettas Googled interesting is that its a history of the company as told by the incumbent sociopaths. These are the people Auletta has spent his life covering: the media moguls who tried to acquire and conquer their own empires of content and delivery. And to them whats most shocking and galling about Googles incredibly rapid rise is that instead of being engineered by a fellow sociopath, it was largely done by normal, decent people plainly applying the forces of new technology.
 
What has Google ever done for the world? ask the sociopaths at various points throughout the book. All they do is steal other peoples content! To a normal human the question is ridiculous  its almost impossible to imagine life without Googling for something, checking your Gmail, or watching videos on YouTube  but sociopaths arent used to doing things that create value for people. Theyre just interested in conquering more and taking control. When Disney bought ABC for $19 billion, it didnt improve most peoples lives in any real way, but it did let Michael Eisner regain control of the company he once ran.
 
So naturally the sociopaths are outraged that their control is being taken away. Newspapers, book publishers, television companies, ad agencies  their businesses are all failing, while Googles is on the rise. The sociopaths may be outraged, but this is exactly whats supposed to happen. Most people dont have a vested interest in whether ABC does well or even continues to exist. What they want are good television shows at a reasonable price, and if they can get those from Apple and Google instead of their local cable company, then bully for Apple and Google.
 
The thing thats hard for the sociopaths to get their head around is that this isnt because one of their rivals has outsmarted them  its just the march of technology. When the only way to get most television shows to peoples houses was over a wire or across airwaves that could only hold so many channels, their particular distribution model made sense. But when the same connection  whether cable, DSL, satellite, or WiFi  can let people download whatever video program they choose, an entirely new model can take hold. The shift isnt Googles fault any more than America should be blamed for breaking off from Pangea.
 
As a result, the closest people to moguls behind the recent shifts in media distribution are two computer science grad students: Larry and Sergey. These guys dont even have the decency to behave like real moguls  they wear t-shirts and sneakers, get bored during meetings, and like to travel around the world instead of around Manhattan. Whats worse, theyre constantly talking about making the world a better place (by, for example, donating 1% of their profits to charity) and empowering the user (by cutting out middlemen and not forcing choices down peoples throats). Sociopaths dont talk like that! Who do these people think they are?
 
Google gets a lot of criticism (often deserved), but its worth taking a moment to think of all the things they havent done. If Microsoft had Googles market share in search, is there any doubt that theyd be systematically demoting or even banning their competitors in the search results? Demoting someone in Google is a virtual death sentence, and yet not only has Google never been accused of using this vast power, the idea itself is almost unimaginable.
 
Hearing things from the sociopaths perspective, its easy to get fooled. Yeah! you think. Why should these Google guys get to control everything? But for average people, this shift has been great: much more stuff is available, faster and freer than ever before, and the people making all the money off of it are actually decent human beings who feel some responsibility for the planet they inhabit. Sure, I dont agree with them on everything and theres a lot more they can do, but lets not lose sight of the basic point: at least theyre not sociopaths.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 14, 2009
 
Demotion in the rankings isnt quite unthinkable:
 
http://jafl.my.speedingbits.com/blog/2009/02/21/google/
 
posted by John Lindal
 on December 14, 2009 #
 
This site, run by Jewish-American journalists Phil Weiss, Adam Horowitz, and Max Blumenthal, lost its Google Ads and had its video taken off Google without sufficient explanation.
  http://mondoweiss.net/2009/06/dont-be-google.html
 
I think Prof. Lenz scepticism towards Google is the wiser option. http://k.lenz.name/LB/ Eternal vigilance and all that.
 
posted by Colin Jacobs
 on December 14, 2009 #
 
I seem to remember that when Wikipedia content started showing up in Google results mirror sites often had higher rating than wikipedia itself.
 
After a while this changed and now Wikipedia pretty well always outranks its mirrors. Did Google change the algorithm? Was it because some fan of wikipedia make a disparaging remark about the Google algorithm to a google techy? I suppose Jimbo Wales might have had a word with Sergey? Did wikipedias own rating just increase over time?
 
Lots of people are discriminated against by the Google algorithm every day and pretty near every one loves them for that because it nearly always picks the site we want and downgrades the site we dont.
 
I want a make-up artist or a portrait photographer to discriminate on the grounds of skin colour.
 
posted by Joe
 on December 14, 2009 #
 
Google is NOT stealing anyones content. Theyre just making it easier to find.
 
posted by Mike Cohen
 on December 14, 2009 #
 
 [N]ot only has Google [n]ever been accused of using this vast power 
 
Actually, yes they have. It doesnt matter whether one agrees that the accusation is validthe accusation has been made, on Whats Up With That among other places: http://wattsupwiththat.com/2009/12/02/google-trends-on-climategate-show-public-interest-increasing-but-troubling-questions-loom/
 
Climategate as a single word seems to be back among the suggested results, at least at the moment, but for quite a while it simply didnt show up despite generating more than twenty-six million results if one insisted on searching for it. Theres been a great deal of concern in some circles over the potential for Google to act on a perceived or apparent liberal political bias.
 
posted by DB
 on December 14, 2009 #
 
Text so naive that it hurts. Plus, peppered with arrogance. This whole generation is lost. Good luck, world.
 
posted by Ronaldo Lui
 on December 14, 2009 #
 
Lord Acton: Power tends to corrupt; absolute power corrupts absolutely.
 
posted by Lina Inverse
 on December 14, 2009 #
 
From about Nov 24 to about Nov 28, Google hid the Google Suggest term climategate as documented here:
 
http://talkingabouttheweather.wordpress.com/2009/12/02/google-gate/
 
They then hid it again from about December 1 to about December 12.
 
I know because I tried it a couple of times per day, every day.  During this time period, there were about 25,000,000 hits to the term climategate, give or take 5 million, each time a search was actually done.  Today it sits at 21,000,000.
 
You may notice Al Gore sits on the board of directors of Google.
 
They say beauty is in the eye of the beholder.  Perhaps a mans normal, decent people are another mans sociopaths?
 
posted by Xavier Itzmann
 on December 14, 2009 #
 
Promotion can be a form of demotion for others. Search Google for Analytics - the first entry is Google Analytics. OK, search Google for email. The first entry is Gmail. Really? Really? After all the years that email has been around, all the pages in the web, the first entry goes to a Google property? OK, search maps. Google Maps, first entry. What a surprise. Go on, give it a spin. Google ends up first, every time. That seems very Microsoft to me.
 
Next head over to bing.com - search on email. First entry, after oafish sponsored links is:  Yahoo Mail!  How un-Microsoft! Search video. First result? Google video!
 
The rest of the text seems rather fanboi-ish, so no need to respond, but I did feel a need to point out what seems rather obvious: Google leverages its search dominance to promoteother Google services. VERY Microsoft thing to do.
 
posted by Cole
 on December 14, 2009 #
 
@DB: Trends rise and fall according to popularity. Climategate is a limited term used by a limited set of English speakers. After people find out its crap, it dropped. Also, if you look at how quoted text spreads across conservative blogs, you will see that some of Googles tactics may hurt anything that propagates like splogs and spam. Quoted boilerplate text has to be deprecated in some way to keep Google relevant.
 
In any case, the criticisms are anecdotal. A genuine criticism will only come from a disgruntled Google employee who reveals some dirty deed or other.
 
posted by Bob Calder
 on December 15, 2009 #
 
You started goofing right from the beginning: Alexander the Great was not a sociopath.
 
posted by Simon
 on December 15, 2009 #
 
Ooooooooooh of course! Microsoft is evil! Google is not! Microsoft would be demoting search results! Google would never tamper with the almighty algorithm for political interests!
 
Unless please compare:
1) http://tinyurl.com/ybjngcx
2) http://tinyurl.com/y9mymxr
 
posted by gregor samsa
 on December 15, 2009 #
 
Bob Calder: Climategate was a less limited termtwenty-six million hits at one pointthan the alternatives Google did permit, climate gateand climate-gate, which were a few million each. My point wasnt that it was a limited term or that it was crap (of which I am not convinced, although neither am I convinced it was not), my point was that the absolutist contention that Google had never been accused of malfeasance was in fact false. It has been accused.
 
As for the anecdotal thing, thats kind of like lies, damned lies, and statistics; its all too easy to dismiss anything that way. Maybe youre right, but its a dangerous contention in this day and age.
 
posted by DB
 on December 15, 2009 #
 
fanboi-ish
 
That is a word that Microsoft apologists project upon other people, to deflect attention from the fact that Microsoft users continue to run a platform that is shockingly technically inferior: the only one with viruses, the only one with commercial malware, the only one that lacks an ISO MPEG-4 player and a W3C HTML5 browser, the only one that lacks basic Unix networking security, the only one that is rated too insecure for online banking, the only one where the majority of users run a 10 year old version. Microsoft has hardly shipped any new products in the 21st century. You would have to be a fanboy to run Microsoft software in 2009. Users of other platforms and products always have an actual technical reason for running them, even if its just that their Windows failed after 6 months and they didnt want to pay a guy $500 to resuscitate it (again) so they got a Mac.
 
but I did feel a need to point out what
  seems rather obvious: Google leverages its
  search dominance to promoteother Google 
  services. VERY Microsoft thing to do.
 
No, you have it wrong. The issue is not Google promoting Google or Microsoft promoting Microsoft; every company does that. In fact, it may be required of them if they are a public company, because its COMPETITIVE behavior. They should not even ship a product if they do not think it is the best in class, worthy of every promotional effort they can make.
 
The issue with Microsoft is ANTI-COMPETITIVE behavior, which unfortunately, few people actually understand, probably you also, and they take it to mean very competitive. Its not. Competitive is when you work twice as hard to become a better figure skater than your competition; anti-competitive is when you pay a guy to knock your figure skating competition in the knees with a pipe.
 
There are thousands of examples of Microsofts unique anti-competitive behavior. The latest is their offer to pay publishers to block all search engine indexing but Microsofts. They also threatened many times to kill MS Office Mac even though it has always been highly profitable (for 24 years now, longer than Windows has existed) in order to exert leverage over Apple instead of competing with them. Microsofts browser is not Web-compatible, its Microsoft-compatible, in order to force publishers to create IE apps that only run on Windows instead of Web apps that run everywhere.
 
By contrast, Google doesnt stop you from using Yahoo or other to search the Web; Googles Search and Maps are as much a part of Apple iPhone as they are Google Android; Googles browser is HTML5 compatible, not Google-compatible, so even if I make a Web app for Google Chrome, it also runs in Safari, Firefox, and Opera, and in IE-with-Chrome-Frame. Googles Chrome Frame makes IE into a competitive browser, its anti-anti-competitive.
 
So I think the author of this article is correct in saying that Google is not playing the same game as Microsoft. They dont have to because they are confident in their ability to compete based on their past history of competing, and because they are focused on what they are doing and building, not what others are doing and building. Microsoft is a different animal, no history of winning through competition, always focused on what others are doing and copying it and then trying to kill the original, and absolutely no idea what time it is now or what time it will be a few years from now.
 
posted by Hamranhansenhansen
 on December 15, 2009 #
 
Yup, read Googled and had the same reaction.  Its just so bitter
 
posted by derrick
 on December 15, 2009 #
 
Absolute bunk. Google are sociopaths, because they wrest control of IP away from IP owners. Sure many IP owners are evil, but authors, musicians, photographers and the rest are also having their lifes work devalued and removed from their control by some of the things Google does.
 
Its not just media titans (although I can see the appeal of attacking a teeny minority that are easy to dislike to make a buck selling a book about them) who deserve criticism, but anyone who removes the profit motive from a persons lifes work for their own financial gain.
 
Google aint a charity.
 
And, how about those Chinese dissidents Google sold out to the communist regime? Talk about sociopathic behavior.
 
Hey, where can I get this Sociopath book for free? Anyone got a URL to the pirated version?
 
/sarcasm
 
posted by Eric
 on December 15, 2009 #
 
Unfortunately, the original post appears to be use the term sociopath incorrectly.  Sociopaths are usually liars, impulsive, and have few long term relationships.  Alexander the Great was not a sociopath.  Most leaders cant be, because they need a long term plan, and cant lie or be impulsive, because that ruins relationships.
 
posted by Tom
 on December 15, 2009 #
 
Wow, what a wave of criticism in the comments! Of course its not black & white  but i think at the core Aaron is right. Of course G. have their own profit, benefit and interests on their agenda. They would be mad if they didnt! But its not as simple as that, their mission is much more complex than other companys. Thanks for the reminder.
 
posted by Michael
 on December 15, 2009 #
 
I bought the book following your link to Amazon.  Do you get any credit for that?
 
posted by Seth russell
 on December 15, 2009 #
 
Demoting someone in Google is a virtual death sentence, and yet not only has Google never been accused of using this vast power, the idea itself is almost unimaginable.
 
The few months I was involved in a lawsuit I had about 4000 hits a day average on my website. The plaintiff starting using SEOs to optimize searches for his company that I had complained about. Then the plaintiff specifically bought keywords that related to my site - even my name and my domain name.
 
After all of this went down - my hit total had diminished to about 500 a day. (Yet I still have 4 articles that rank VERY high in search results)
 
Google DOES allow systematic demotion at their own profit - to anyone thats willing to pay. They arent accused - they practice, they preach, they perform, they promote this very scenario.
 
posted by fixyourthinking
 on December 15, 2009 #
 
There is doubt that Microsoft would systematically demote rivals. There would clearly be lawsuits, the outcome would be clear; Microsoft generally dont create problems for themselves like that.
 
Your base idea for the post appears to be some systematic division between sociopaths and everybody else. I think thats tenuous and requires justification.
 
posted by no
 on December 16, 2009 #
 
 There would clearly be lawsuits, the outcome would be clear; Microsoft generally doesnt create problems like that.
 
Have you heard/read about the European lawsuits?  Theyve been fined 2+ BILLION for imbedding their browser into their OS - in Europe only. In the US where they lobby and have political influence, they get a way with it. Some have said ( including MS) that they do it for the benefit of the people by keeping costs low for the consumer. If that were the case, then the US govt should only have one carmaker, one sports owner, one TV station, one newspaper etc. Granted Bill Gates ( and I think his father) were smart about licensing MS-DOS thru Windows 7 , but the only way to retain customers (in their view) has been  to have a hook into the software. only THEY can reverse engineer every piece of software written - since they have the key. Remember when disks couldnt break the 2gb barrier ? Stac Electronics had software that would compress data on the drive. It was very complicated and MS could not decode the math. They partenered  with Stac - for about 2 weeks. Then they told Stac to go away. Stac sued and won. Yeah it cost MS some money in the lawsuit but they didnt care - it did away with the competition.
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stac_Electronics
 
MAC, Netscape, Lotus 1-2-3, Wordperfect, every one copied. Its their EGO not benevolence that makes them want it. It kept their lock on the consumer.
 
On the other hand, Google ( and Yahoo) have no direct cost to the consumer. ( now if you wanted to say their after the business market, thats another topic.
 
posted by bobb 
 on December 21, 2009 #
 
Why should these Google guys get to control everything? 
I have heard complaints from the content providers and agree with the concept - were it not for the providers Goggle wouldnt exist. BUT , by the same token, WITHOUT Google that newspapers website wouldnt have gotten the 50,000 hits received from Google directing inquiring users there.
 
posted by yeah but
 on December 21, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November 29, 2009
 
Title: How I Hire Programmers
 
Espaol
 
There are three questions you have when youre hiring a programmer (or anyone, for that matter): Are they smart? Can they get stuff done? Can you work with them? Someone whos smart but doesnt get stuff done should be your friend, not your employee. You can talk your problems over with them while they procrastinate on their actual job. Someone who gets stuff done but isnt smart is inefficient: non-smart people get stuff done by doing it the hard way and working with them is slow and frustrating. Someone you cant work with, you cant work with.
 
The traditional programmer hiring process consists of: a) reading a resume, b) asking some hard questions on the phone, and c) giving them a programming problem in person. I think this is a terrible system for hiring people. You learn very little from a resume and people get real nervous when you ask them tough questions in an interview. Programming isnt typically a job done under pressure, so seeing how people perform when nervous is pretty useless. And the interview questions usually asked seem chosen just to be cruel. I think Im a pretty good programmer, but Ive never passed one of these interviews and I doubt I ever could.
 
So when I hire people, I just try to answer the three questions. To find out if they can get stuff done, I just ask what theyve done. If someone can actually get stuff done they should have done so by now. Its hard to be a good programmer without some previous experience and these days anyone can get some experience by starting or contributing to a free software project. So I just request a code sample and a demo and see whether it looks good. You learn an enormous amount really quickly, because youre not watching them answer a contrived interview question, youre seeing their actual production code. Is it concise? clear? elegant? usable? Is it something youd want in your product?
 
To find out whether someones smart, I just have a casual conversation with them. I do everything I can to take off any pressure off: I meet at a cafe, I make it clear its not an interview, I do my best to be casual and friendly. Under no circumstances do I ask them any standard interview questions  I just chat with them like I would with someone I met at a party. (If you ask people at parties to name their greatest strengths and weaknesses or to estimate the number of piano tuners in Chicago, youve got bigger problems.) I think its pretty easy to tell whether someones smart in casual conversation. I constantly make judgments about whether people I meet are smart, just like I constantly make judgments about whether people I see are attractive.
 
But if I had to write down what it is that makes someone seem smart, Id emphasize three things. First, do they know stuff? Ask them what theyve been thinking about and probe them about it. Do they seem to understand it in detail? Can they explain it clearly? (Clear explanations are a sign of genuine understanding.) Do they know stuff about the subject that you dont?
 
Second, are they curious? Do they reciprocate by asking questions about you? Are they genuinely interested or just being polite? Do they ask follow-up questions about what youre saying? Do their questions make you think?
 
Third, do they learn? At some point in the conversation, youll probably be explaining something to them. Do they actually understand it or do they just nod and smile? There are people who know stuff about some small area but arent curious about others. And there are people who are curious but dont learn, they ask lots of questions but dont really listen. You want someone who does all three.
 
Finally, I figure out whether I can work with someone just by hanging out with them for a bit. Many brilliant people can seem delightful in a one-hour conversation, but their eccentricities become grating after a couple hours. So after youre done chatting, invite them along for a meal with the rest of the team or a game at the office. Again, keep things as casual as possible. The point is just to see whether they get on your nerves.
 
If all that looks good and Im ready to hire someone, theres a final sanity check to make sure I havent been fooled somehow: I ask them to do part of the job. Usually this means picking some fairly separable piece we need and asking them to write it. (If you really insist on seeing someone working under pressure, give them a deadline.) If necessary, you can offer to pay them for the work, but I find most programmers dont mind being given a small task like this as long as they can open source the work when theyre done. This test doesnt work on its own, but if someones passed the first three parts, it should be enough to prove they didnt trick you, they can actually do the work.
 
(Ive known some people who say OK, well why dont we try hiring you for a month and see how it goes. This doesnt seem to work. If you cant make up your mind after a small project you also cant make it up after a month and you end up hiring people who arent good enough. Better to just say no and err on the side of getting better people.)
 
Im fairly happy with this method. When Ive skipped parts, Ive ended up with bad hires who eventually had to be let go. But when Ive followed it, Ive ended up with people I like so much so that I actually feel bad I dont get to work with them anymore. Im amazed that so many companies use such silly hiring methods instead.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 29, 2009
 
Yup.
 
posted by Russell L. Carter
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Thanks for writing this. Ive always wondered why tech hiring is so screwed up. For an industry that thinks a lot about a lot of things, hiring is one thing that doesnt seem to have changed much over the years. Scaling this method of hiring might be tricky though. Another idea worth trying is to hire everyone as an intern initially and then, make a decision after a month of actually working with them.
 
posted by Abi Raja
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
+1. Totally agree.
 
However, for a different point of view check out this StackOverflow question:
 
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1059948/should-inability-to-code-under-pressure-be-a-valid-excuse-when-writing-code-in
 
posted by Ramin
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Exception programmers are also creative - nothing was mentioned of that. They can see beyond the smaller details of a task and problem. They can put themselves outside of themselves, into the user space.
 
posted by Mark Rushing
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
The problem with asking about what a person has done, is almost uniformly, people will answer with what their team has done, couched as if they did it. They are familiar enough with what the team has done, to talk about it semi-intelligently.
 
Sorry, i want them to answer something in front of me. It doesnt have to be real hard, but it has to be real, and they should ace it.
 
posted by MeBigFatGuy
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Someone who gets stuff done but isnt smart is inefficient: non-smart people get stuff done by doing it the hard way and working with them is slow and frustrating. 
 
I couldnt read anything passed that stubborn remark.
 
posted by 
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
I really like your idea for figuring out if people are smart, especially the bit about asking what theyve been thinking about, and continually probing (in a non threatening way) to see what level they understand something.
 
Very good ideas that Ill be stealing from next time.
 
What I didnt get though, was how you determine if someone actually gets something done.  Ive met a few smart people who have extreme understanding of a variety of complex subjects, but just dont produce an awful lot.
 
Perhaps theres no way to tell for that particular case.  There have also been times, though the exception, when I had talked to someone for an hour, been confident they were smart, and have them utterly fail the most simple programming test (fizbuzz, recursive method, etc.)
 
I wonder if your method would have screened out those candidates that appeared smart in the hour I chatted with them
 
posted by Vincent
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
The problem with a code sample is that it can be the product of other people.  Even if the entire thing might not be the product of someone else, it could of been reviewed by many other people.
 
And if they cant code under pressure how are they going to fix a bug that needs to be dealt with immediately.  No one performs excellent under pressure, but a substantial amount of their programming abilities shouldnt dissipate because of it.
 
posted by Kyle
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
The comments here and on Hacker News reminded me I left out a step. Ive added it:
 
If all that looks good and Im ready to hire someone, theres a final sanity check to make sure I havent been fooled somehow: I ask them to do part of the job. Usually this means picking some fairly separable piece we need and asking them to write it. (If you really insist on seeing someone working under pressure, give them a deadline.) If necessary, you can offer to pay them for the work, but I find most programmers dont mind being given a small task like this as long as they can open source the work when theyre done. This test doesnt work on its own, but if someones passed the first three parts, it should be enough to prove they didnt trick you, they can actually do the work.
 
(Ive known some people who say OK, well why dont we try hiring you for a month and see how it goes. This doesnt seem to work. If you cant make up your mind after a small project you also cant make it up after a month and you end up hiring people who arent good enough. Better to just say no and err on the side of getting better people.)
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
great post.  i loved it.  it can be applied to so many other jobs besides programming.
 
posted by winzoAL
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
I am looking to be hired it is a great post
 
posted by avanzaweb
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
This seems like a good approach, but the one part I disagree with is having to provide a code sample. I dont program outside of work, apart from the odd script or php debug. All my code samples would be from uni, and while some of them are pretty good, most are of the oh-god-five-hours-to-deadline-quick-finish-it! level of quality. This might be because Ive only just finished uni, but only two of the 40+ people on my course have done any sort of extra-cirricular programming.
 
Id like to think Im a pretty decent programmer, but have never written (production-level) code in my free time (I prefer to do things not related to my day job). Sure youll be getting the cream of programmers if you request a code sample, but youll be missing out a lot of decent ones at the same time.
 
posted by Fin
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Thats an interesting way to hire somebody, though Im not sure that completely removing the interview part is a good thing. I mean, if Im hiring a programmer for working over giant datasets at the very least Id ask for how a binary search works and when it makes sense to use it or how hed process a 4Tb file. Besides, I agree that this part should be reduced to a minimum, so we can at least know that the applicant knows the required theory. Then looking at source code he has written is much more interesting than asking him to write down a working quicksort.
 
posted by Ivan
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Can they explain it clearly? (Clear explanations are a sign of genuine understanding.)
 
Great post but the above is not always true, in my opinion. What if youre interviewing a top programmer who happens to be a foreigner? If hes speaking to you in his second language he may not necessarily always be as articulate as you expected, yet he may certainly still have a genuine understanding and be a top programmer.
 
posted by Peter
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Im surprised not to see a nod to Joel Spolsky here.
 
posted by 
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Aarons approach to hiring seems intuitively spot on.
 
Heres what I find lacking in this approach:
- By no means is this an universal approach. Rather, its much more suitable for startups and companies with relatively small tightly-knit teams. Bigger teams are probably far too heterogeneous to employ anyone whos not a smart stand-up comedian with solid coding skills. On the other hand, big companies are most probably messed up already so theres no one-size-fits-all solution for them.
- Sufficient interaction with their potential coworkers is lacking. Even though the most competent person in the company should eventually decide, feedback from future coworkers should be taken into account. Could this rectified by having them work on a little piece of your project in the same environment as others? If the environment is virtual then virtual it is, if not, shouldnt be the test take place?
- In more interesting job positions there are several problem domains that one needs to excel in. For such cases you definitely need a person from each such problem domain repeat the entire soft interview cycle. Is it feasible? If its possible for you - then I think it is.
 
Cheers!
Shonzilla
 
posted by Shonzilla
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Im sure that process works well for you, but Im concerned it may not be entirely legal.
 
The external interview is constructed in a way that makes it much more difficult for certain people.  Some mild mental illnesses and personality disorders could make a candidate completely non-functional in such a setting.  The same candidate could be extremely engaging and lucid in an office setting talking about Work Stuff.
 
Under equal opportunity employment rules, its important that you do not subject a candidate to any tests that are not directly relevant to job performance.  I think this interview especially when you somewhat deceitfully tell the candidate that its NOT an interview meets that criteria of not being directly relevant.
 
Of course, the content of the conversation is important, too.  In a more relaxed setting, there may be more likelihood of the interviewer or candidate accidentally discussing topics which are not legally permissible in the hiring process.
 
The bottom line is, I would recommend that you and your readers speak to a lawyer before using this process again.
 
posted by el_gregorio
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
How do you get this process to scale? Especially in an institution like Microsoft or Google..
 
posted by Cherian
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Id given up interviewing because it seemed like people performing the interviews were employing the very techniques Mr. Swartz criticizes, it is a pleasant and welcomed surprise to see that someone from the hiring side thinks like I do.
 
That said, Im still in dismay for if a prospective employer said something like I make it clear its not an interview thats a warning sign that the speaker is not being genuine or truthful and at that point, Id conclude the interview indicating I do not see a good match.
 
Bottom line: I stay where I am because I really really like my boss (I feel I should be paid more) and at the end of the day, if Im not happy with the people I work with, Im not going to produce the kind of work that my employer is paying for.
 
posted by Anonymous
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
I agree with this post completely. It makes me think of Moneyball. Most companies are like the sports GMs who look for players with certain body types and who perform well at certain athletic tests in individual workouts  rather than concerning themselves with how the player will play (and has played in the past) in the actual games.
 
posted by Greg
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
My background is a professional programmer for 4 years, including conducting 20-30 phone interviews and about a dozen or so in person interviews. Im no expert, but thought Id share a few comments.
 
I like the holistic approach - is this a smart guy? But Im not sure this interview approach is appropriate for programmers:
 
Plenty of excellent coders are social introverts, and would not do well in such a casual setting. These people tend to prefer formality and the work environment, and are articulate and engaging w/ coworkers in a work setting. They may fail miserably in your interview process.
 
Very tech lite interview. Like another poster, Ive encountered plenty of guys that seemed really smart in a conversation, but couldnt do the most basic programming tasks (omg recursion!?!). I think asking some screener questions before wasting time in person is a good idea (which is what most companies do).
 
I think the concepts borrowed from Joel Spolsky (get things done, smart) are definitely something that should be part of the hiring process. And a code sample is super important - although I prefer to give an offline code question and see the results (due to typical problems with previous pieces of code, i.e. did they write it? is it legal for them to show me another companys code?)
 
But the other stuff, sitting down with them in a cafe, working with the group for a day Im not sure its much of an improvement.
 
posted by Anonymous
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
@Greg, speaking of Moneyball a lot of programmers now have public work records, much like college athletes have stats that pro scouts can examine.
 
On the subject of getting things done  hiring managers do seem to be looking at open source contributions, and have been for a while.  But with git log and git blame and the equivalents, a hiring manager who knows a little bit about using a DVCS could get a very detailed look at an individuals work within a project.  Anyone seeing this happening?
 
posted by Don Marti
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Hey thanks for this, its a helpful discussion for me.  I often have to wear the businessman hat, but I feel like an idiot when it comes to all things business.
 
This process of course assumes that interviewer is smart enough to discern whether the interviewee is smart ;).  Three cheers for small companies with direct hiring processes, and for dumb people sticking together!
 
posted by Jon
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Great post.  As someone who has gone through a lot of hiring processes (Im an independent developer/consultant), I wish more organizations would take this approach.  As someone who has occasionally been involved in hiring, I try to use a similar approach as much as possible.  My mantra is to hire primarily based on attitude and aptitude, which more or less boils down to what you are talking about.  I hope to be in a position of influencing more hiring processes in the future and I will remember your thoughts.  Thanks!
 
posted by Shea Phillips
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
I dont enjoy small-talks and chitchats. At most parties I feel pretty bored. I suspect many techie types have this trait, and we will not leave a good impression during the cafe interview.
 
posted by BY
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Wow. I really like this method. I was thinking to myself the other day when building business relationships you also are technically just networking with people and making friends. When you are genuinely interested in conversation with another person you can get a better feeling on whether the person is more geared as a potential person to work with, or just a friend, or neither, depending if they pass the steps :)
 
posted by Vinnie T
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
I wish more interviews where that way.
Seems like almost large company rather ask to build a binary tree parser over the phone or some other question like that.
1) One its very hard to do over the phone.
2) Who remembers that sort of school stuffs years after learning it.
3) A good programmer will know how to find that kind of info online and use it, and doesnt need to memorize it, especially since it changes so fast in this field.
 
Programming is about logic, quick thinking and perseverance not memorizing !
 
posted by Thibaut Colar
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Aaron, you are overcomplicating. All you need to know is if they care.
 
If they care about it, theyll do whatever it takes to aquire expertise and get smart at it. It will be a means to a clear end and no time will be wasted on distractions.
 
If they care about it, theyll get it done without caring for if theyre getting things done. Even getting things efficiently is crushing to someone who does not care for what they do.
 
If they care about it, and you care enough about it, then youll both get on just fine. Most relationships are built on the basis of 2 people having a common interest. If this interest is in  something you work on all day, all the better.
 
posted by Gaurav Sharma
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Funny, Ive used a similar process when interviewing potential students for my alma mater to provide an alumnus recommendation. I dont ask  specific things, but find out if he or she has a passion about something (anything!) that will help drive them through having a meaningful college experience. (True at my a.m. as well as any.)
 
Its often remarkable to me to meet prospectives who seem to have spent their entire lives avoiding feeling very strongly about anything. Ive also met incredible kids with world-changing amounts of energy and intelligence.
 
I should use my college interview techniques (which are parts 2 & 3 of your above notions) for future job candidates.
 
posted by Glenn Fleishman
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
@Fin: I dont program outside of work, apart from the odd script or php debug.  Honestly, that alone is a problem. Good programmers write code; the ones who only do it at work are just doing it because its a job.
 
Code written for work is often written under conditions guaranteeing its compromised in some way and probably isnt representative of the best work youre capable of.  The code you write for yourself is going to be your best stuff.
 
On another topic, Im bothered by the fact that this process is slanted in favor of social extroverts. Youre probably missing good people who just dont do well in the kind of situation youre creating, which many people find more stressful than a formal interview.
 
posted by Jeremy
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Surely no one comes to your casual meeting over drinks or whatever thinking that it is NOT an interview in disguise.
 
How do you get away without being sued for discrimination?
 
posted by John Corbin
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
You have to be a little careful of this approach with regards to anti-discrimination laws.  When you dont have any sort of firm metrics by which to judge candidates, its easy for someone to say they didnt get the job because you dont get along with black/white/latino/asian people.
 
posted by Sam
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
A lot of this is obvious.  Is the person likable?  Do they seem smart and do their answers make sense?  Are they learners?  Will this person drive me crazy after a month?
 
Other things like working on small projects for me or temporary evaluation assignments dont scale well - at least not any large company that Ive ever worked for.
 
posted by Bill B
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
If I was a programmer and looking to be hired this is the process I would like to go through.  It is applicable to many (but not all) hiring scenarios for a small team. 
The lack of scalability is why Google and Microsoft wont benefit from it, and why it is a legal quagmire for all but the smallest and smartest.
That it works is attested by the second last sentence, I actually feel bad when I dont geet to work with them any more
 
posted by Jim Harvie
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
I was with you up till the part about asking someone to write code for free. That would immediately turn me off and I would decline. I have nothing against doing work for free but I wouldnt give away my work to anyone just to be hired.
 
Ask me about some freeware that Ive done. Ask to see code. Those are fine. But remember, I dont know you or your company just like you dont know me. There is a huge warning sign when someone wants some work for free instead of hiring a programmer. You may have nothing but the best intentions but I dont know that.
 
posted by James Bailey
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Ive added a few thoughts of my own on my blog, but overall this resonates deeply with me. If you dont hire a smart person, then you wont be getting a good employee
 
posted by Joshua Jabbour
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Thats because you fall into the non-smart category. Otherwise you would have used past. Sorry, you dont get the job.
 
posted by SSteve
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Let me get this straightIf they cant converse with you, then they are not smart.
 
posted by Mike
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Inviting the candidate to a team function (like a game or lunch) sounds like a bad idea, to be frank. First of all, it puts your entire team on the defensive so as not to leak confidential information, opinions of the candidate up to that point, etc.
 
Secondly, it sends mixed signals to the candidate. If someone I was interviewing with said, Hey lets play a game of fuzbol with the team or something, Id interpret that as essentially having the job in the bag.
 
Like it or not, interviews are professional situations and should be approached professionally. Inviting a candidate in the middle of an interview out for a casual meal or coffee for some chit-chat and then saying its not an interview is also disingenuous. Especially now that youve posted this technique in a blog post entitled How I Hire Programmers. If you use it to determine whether the candidate is smart, its part of the interview, period. Its going to influence your decision.
 
This is why interactions with candidates during the interview process should be and are kept strictly professional, because any interaction you have with a candidate is going to influence your judgment. By making it more casual, youre opening yourself up to a claim that you decided to hire or not hire someone based on factors not relevant to the position.
 
posted by Damien Sorresso
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
This article is the first I have seen showing someone being smart about the hiring process.
 
The concern that this is not scalable is a legitimate one but the way things are done today seems like a game show IMO. You can argue that hey if youre smart then win the game. To me the accepted mainstream way for getting hired is about putting up a facade.
 
I was watching a video on interviewing techniques and the HR person said This how you should answer question X, it is the ONLY way. Wtf? My conclusion is clearly this person is a closed minded idiot.
 
Personally I dont know every data structure and every algorithm and quite frankly with a modern programming languages and APIs where you dont implement a linked list everyday it seems reasonable that its not at your fingertips. However, if I have good reason or hobby time to dive deeper I sure would because its fun knowledge and Ill most likely know more after such an experience.
 
Maybe I have the wrong attitude but I too have given up on interviewing, call it quitting if you want, but no job and nothing to do but code and read books just makes me know more everyday than I did the day before.
 
posted by John D
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
You have to be careful about being [too] social but if the people that are going to work for you are going to be in a comfortable environment then so should the interview process. Yes it is profession but I thought the goal was to learn about the person, seems like the goal is about passing some test. Then again what do I know, seems like the scalable way is to standardize the process, but Ive always thought that people that use standardized tests to get a feel for how smart someone truly is are idiots.
 
posted by Stewie
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
@Jeremy: Regarding your reply to Fin:
 
I dont see not doing programming outside of work as a problem.  There are issues of life/work balance to consider and even if you really love programming and are great at it, that doesnt mean that you have any time or energy to do much programming  aside from what you do for your job.  In fact that could mean that you dont consider your job just at job and youre giving it all your development and programming energy.
 
Yes, code written for work usually involves compromises: dealing with existing systems, objectives and design decisions didnt all go your way, schedule is too short, etc.  But that doesnt mean that your code for that project is compromised. Knowing how a developer works under those conditions and the quality of their code under those conditions is something most hiring mangers would dearly love to know.
 
Also, Im sure you didnt mean it this way, but your second paragraph above would make me as a hiring manager wonder if youre saving your best for yourself and if you have trouble working with others. Is the code you write for yourself more clear, concise, efficient, etc? If so why arent you striving to do the same things for your code at work even in the face of compromises and other work pressures? My concern would also be that your definition of best included a large amount of: Everything is exactly the way I want it to be.
 
Sorry if Ive misinterpreted what you were trying to say, but I thought another perspective might be useful.
 
posted by David Ballenger
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
I dont belive that hiring developers are that different from hiring in many other fields. You have the same basic questions, just like you described, and there are a fantastic amount of bad hires in most organizations. Unfortunatly a sizeable portion of all humans doesnt seem all that employable really.
 
The quirky hiring processes are more than likely the long evolution of inept people hiring others. Being scared of screwing up (btw, people who are afraid to screw up more than often so screw up because of their fear) and being clever by devising tests.
 
posted by Flekkzo
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
Anything Ive written worth a damn is owned by my employer. If you are looking for people just starting out, asking for a sample is fine. But as someone else said, I have too many other interests to go home and do the same thing Ive been doing all day. Otherwise yes, the only reason Id ever ask someone to swap variables without using a temp is to hear them explain why thats a terrible (and useless) idea.
 
posted by Dave
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
el_gregorio, are you by any chance a lawyer who doesnt have enough work to do?
 
posted by John C. Randolph
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
@David Ballenger:
 
I would be deeply suspicious of a programmer who never writes his own code. Have you really never solved a problem of your own by writing code to do it? How is that even possible? I use my own code just to make my own computer work the way I want, let alone things like running a website or whatever. Did you just learn it in school as a job?  My experience is that really good programmers arent those people.
 
What I meant about your own code being better is simply that, when youre writing code for work, you are usually severely restricted by working within someone elses design; working with a large, existing codebase; working with other programmers; conforming to badly-thought-out coding guidelines; etc.  Looking at someones code written under those conditions without knowing about them will probably result in being less impressed than you might be. Why did you do this in this convoluted way?  Because I had to.  If you fully understood the restrictions it might even be more impressive, but you cant.
 
posted by Jeremy
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
Congratulations, youve just selected for likability over smarts.
 
posted by Xofis
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
Ah, Ive missed the getting to know them bit by going out to lunch. That is just up my alley, and if I find myself back in that position, Ill definitely utilize that.
 
Thanks for sharing.
 
posted by Ben
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
You might find First, Break All the Rules: Whats the Worlds Greatest Managers Do Differently by Marcus Buckingham.
 
From Amazon  no affiliate link:
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0684852861/managementcon-20/102-3775167-1472903
 
posted by Bill Quinn
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
Any interview method that does not focus on revealing the passion the programmer brings to a project is a waste.  I know great programmers that dont care enough about their projects to write any decent code, and I know fair programmers that have risen to the challenge to create creative and surprising answers to tough programming problems.
 
Find the passion and you will find the programmer.
 
posted by js
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
@Jeremy
 
Sure I write code to do things and solve problems on my own systems.  I never said never. But that code is not representative of the types of stuff Ive done at work where Ive worked on compilers, operating systems components and utilities, and large scale distributed systems.  And while I like to think that the code Ive written at home is well written I dont feel that it is a a scope to show what I do on the job.
 
I also have other interests that I like to spend time on as well, plus spend time with family and friends, so the amount of time that I have to code on my own compared with work is much more limited.
 
Maybe Ive been lucky in that the projects that Ive worked on were rarely just a job. They were projects with interesting problems to solve and new things to learn and do. And I had the chance to work with some great software engineers and programmers who also didnt look at what we were doing as just a job. The great ones were passionate about the projects they were working on. Probably a lot of us were still thinking about the project after work whenever that was. Those types of jobs take up a lot of technical focus and energy.  While you might do some of your own programming after work, it helps to have other interests that will let your mind recharge for the next day.
 
posted by David Ballenger
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
@js: I know great programmers that dont care enough about their projects to write any decent code
 
I wouldnt call those great programmers.  They might have great knowledge and maybe skills, but if they dont apply those skills, they arent great programmers.
 
posted by 
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
When I interview with a company for a position, its is as much about whether they are an acceptable employer as whether I am an acceptable employee.
 
If you want samples of my code, be prepared to pay for them. I am a professional; code is my product. The best code Ive written is either only shared under NDA or client-proprietary. Some of it requires a security clearance.
 
If you insist that we have a conversation about non-job related topics, its likely that a you have criteria for employment that violate the law, and that could get you into a real mess.
 
If you say this isnt an interview, youve just lied to me. I dont work for people I cant trust.
 
posted by Jim Nicholson
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
Great article - Most of these comments can apply to non-programmer hiring as well!  Its all about working together as a team with smart people!
 
posted by Chris Hedley
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
Awesome article! I posted a response to it on my blog relating it to Web Developers. http://jrtashjian.com/blog/be-a-better-programmer/
 
posted by JR Tashjian
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
How about vetting lots of interviews?
 
posted by sensei
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
Interesting way to interview for a small business, but when you have a larger business with an HR department that has to hire anyone from programmers to sales people to accountants to shippers, the HR are limited in understanding what you, the boss, wants, and people that would probably be what the boss want might not necessarily make it past the HR department due to some missing magic keyword or some odd spelling error.
 
Sometimes the HR departments use interesting cookie cutter paste-n-copy such as 5 years experience with CPU X (which has only existed 3 months).
 
Overall, it is an interesting blog and I could see this method of interview being used by a small creative team where the boss is the one that hires (and not a 3rd party like an HR department).
 
posted by Joe
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
I guarantee EVERY engineer from India would fail your test. They are money suckers and code leeches.
 
posted by Indian
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
This validates my own process - thank you. On the two occassions I have failed to stick to such principles, things have fallen apart. If an engineer (or anyone else for that matter) oversells themselves or pressures you, that is a red flag moment. Summary: Remain 100% inside your mutual comfort zone - for as long as the relationship lasts.
 
posted by Oflife
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
To know if they are any good at work it usually boils down to the fact if they know the answer to life , the universe and everything.
 
If they dont you can order the bill.
 
Jolly
 
posted by Patrick aka Jolly
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
Programming isnt typically a job done under pressure
 
Really? I have never worked anywhere where there is not a significant amount of pressure.
 
posted by Devmentia
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
One problem, though. It takes a smart person to recognize another smart person. Theres been research to back this. So your advice falls flat on its back when applied by a not-so-smart interviewer.
 
posted by icyclectic
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
Aaron,
 
You should probably take this article down right now.
 
Every single candidate that you interviewed with this process over the past years and that you ended up not hiring can sue you and your company for discrimination, and with this article as supporting evidence, they will most likely prevail in court.
 
posted by Harold
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
That last sanity check is important we are hiring a new programmer and we have seen people make it through the interview with flying colors only to crash and burn during the sanity check.
 
posted by Daniel Sellers
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
Would someone mind telling me what youre hiring for?  What business/startup do you (Aaron) run?
 
posted by Brendan
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
@Joe:
 
In a large company it doesnt have to be just HR involved in hiring.
 
I worked for a reasonably large firm (offices in 10 countries) with a pretty big IT department.  For IT hires the interview process included someone from HR but also the line manager and the team leader of the team they would be working in.  Sometimes senior developers would be involved as well.  The HR person was only there to cover the bureaucratic stuff.  The line manager and team lead were there for the technical stuff, and to see if the prospective hire would fit in.  Worked well.
 
posted by SimonTewbi
 on December  1, 2009 #
 
I couldnt agree more. This method has worked extremely well for me.
 
posted by Twylo
 on December  1, 2009 #
 
So the bottom line is, you only hire stupid and naive programmers who dont mind being deceived, lied to and manipulated?
 
Well, Im sure the result is mutually satisfying. Like an S&M relationship.
 
posted by Rick
 on December  1, 2009 #
 
I couldnt agree more.
 
good article.
 
posted by Veera
 on December  1, 2009 #
 
Wish everyone hired like you. You seem to treat each person as an individual instead of a process.
 
posted by Rodger
 on December  1, 2009 #
 
You should have some written test, just in case someone would sue you for discrimination. Written test can prove this very easily.
 
posted by Bubak
 on December  1, 2009 #
 
Thanks for your honesty, now it makes me feel much better :)
 
Im a pretty good programmer, but Ive never passed one of these interviews and I doubt I ever could.
 
Failed Google (5 times), failed Amazon, failed Facebook, failed FriendFeed, failed YouTube, failed Ning  anytime there was an interview I have failed.
 
Aaron, may I ask you how you got a job at Google?
 
Alex K
 
posted by Alex K
 on December  1, 2009 #
 
Why dont you have a sleep over as well?
 
posted by Bill
 on December  1, 2009 #
 
OK, here are some gross generalizations:
 
posted by J
 on December  1, 2009 #
 
Thanks for your honest writing. Its not often that you hear someone boldly state his opinion when it questions common practices and norms. The more valuable it gets then.
 
I share your opinion. Asking tricky questions and conducting psychological tests is pointless, you end up with wrong people for the job.
 
More to it, if you see a company do these things, you can raise a red flag. Because you can pretty much guess what kind of colleagues youre going to get there.
 
Personality, attitude and willingness to learn is what matters. Not knowing answers to tricky questions or remembering some weird algorithms from university you graduated from over ten years ago.
 
Write more good stuff!
 
posted by Developer Art
 on December  2, 2009 #
 
I had the misfortune of being the lead developer for a company where the boss did the hiring. I was only allowed to scan the resumes and have one talk with the applicant. Every single programmer I picked where labeled too nerdy, too alternative, too smelly looking (for real!) etc. Every bloody time they hired people they liked. The result was programmers who couldnt program but were too nice to fire. 
This article comes pretty close to how I would like to be hired and how Id like to hire people myself.
 
posted by Marsk
 on December  2, 2009 #
 
I would also read their blog if they have one. Amazing how much you can tell about a person from their blog
 
posted by rrtucci
 on December  3, 2009 #
 
Are they under 25?
Do they ride a motorbike?
 
Anyone asking for a specific language (c, java haskell etc) should not be hiring programmers, they should only book hotels, meetings and talk on the phone all day
 
You can give them the (test) problems upfront, well in advance of the interview
 
Only those with a full motorcyle licence and motorbike who are under 26 will recive an invite
 
Your method looks like somekind of sexual selection, which may not be an invalid way of judging inteligence given it has evolved to be sexualy stimulating (or is it the otherway round chicken egg kind of thing)
 
Yeah, two interviewers, male/female and if you both like them thats a sure sign
 
I once lost a job by tucking into the free beer provided, that says a lot
 
posted by mike panero
 on December  3, 2009 #
 
I read this article, and I thought about how I would do in that process, and it seems to me that Id do dismally.  Except that Im a successful programmer who gets stuff done, and thats what your process is supposed to identify.
 
First off, I have a life outside of programming.  Programming is something I do because Im reasonably good at it and it pays me well enough to pursue the things I really love.  If you ask me what Ive accomplished in the past few years, you have two options:  you can hear about what my team has accomplished, or you can hear about the things I do in my free time that are completely unrelated to programming.  Im happy to explain the technical details of knitting or 16th century music to you; that wont tell you anything about my particular Perl skills.
 
And Im a task-focused introvert.  To be honest, until I get to know you, Im really not interested in you  so Im not going to ask questions about you and be genuinely interested.  If youre working on something that interests me - either because its related to one of the non-technical things Im interested in, or because its something I think will be useful in programming, Im interested; but otherwise, Im happy to fake interest, but I cant fake genuine interest.
 
Second, Im an introvert.  Your casual, unstructured caf conversation sounds like torture to me:  I dont know enough about you to have a casual conversation with you, and despite your assurances that its not an interview, youre considering hiring me, and if I know that, theres no way I can believe that its not an interview.  You arent going to get a good read of me in such a casual environment, and Ill be miserable about it.  We arent going to talk like we would at a party, because I dont go to parties, because I find them abjectly miserable experiences.
 
And that goes double for a large group of people.  A group dinner where I have to deal with the rest of the team, and I know Im being evaluated for fit?  An hour of that, and Ill be prepared to confess to the JFK assassination just to make it end.
 
Your approach seems like it is excellently suited to finding people who are extroverts and who have programming as the primary interest in their life.  If thats the kind of people youre looking for, more power to you.  Maybe you want people who eat, sleep, and breathe software, and its good that youd pass right by me, because Im not that person.
 
You say you want someone who is smart, gets things done, and can work well with a team, and it seems like your process will do that without producing many false positives.  But its also likely to produce a high number of false negatives, too.
 
posted by CW
 on December  4, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November 14, 2009
 
Title: Is the DMCA a scam?
 
I received my first DMCA takedown notice today. I published publicly-available IRS information about the nonprofit Kwaze-Kwasa [USA] Inc. Kwaze-Kwasa sent a letter to my ISP asking that it be taken down. I do not know why they want to keep this public information off the Internet, but I do know that the law lets them.
 
For those who arent familiar, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act contained a section known as OCILLA (distinct from its also-famous anticircumvention provisions) that regulates publishing copyrighted material online.
 
There are three big parties with interests in this subject: copyright holders, who want strong tools to keep copyrighted material offline; ISPs, who dont want copyright law to apply to them and Internet users, who want to be able to publish and read interesting content. OCILLA was largely written by ISPs and pretty much maximizes their interests at the expense of copyright holders and users.
 
Im very glad that copyright holders get the short end of the stick  they want to modify the law to make sites like YouTube illegal, just because some people upload copyrighted material to it. If they had their way, websites based around user-generated content would pretty much be impossible.
 
But I am frustrated the law doesnt do enough for users. The takedown notice I was sent was obviously bogus  it didnt even allege a copyright violation, since the information I published wasnt even copyrightable (it was all basic facts and statistics published by the US government). Yet my ISP informed me that if I didnt take the page down, theyd take my entire website offline. And they have to do that because if they dont, they can be sued under the copyright law and could face very heavy penalties.
 
To get the page backup, I have to swear under penalty of perjury that I think the takedown was a mistake (yet the sender of a takedown does not have to swear that they think the takedown is valid!), consent to a lawsuit if the sender disagrees, and wait two weeks. Two weeks!
 
In short, the DMCA lets you get any page taken off the Internet for two weeks. This isnt just a law itching for abuse; its a law being abused.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 14, 2009
 
Hi Aaron,
 
I have sent a few DMCA notices in the past and the sender of a takedown does have to swear under penalty of perjury.
 
If the DMCA you received is bogus you can probably fire back. Talk to a lawyer.
 
http://www.mcanerin.com/EN/articles/copyright-03.asp
 
posted by Yuval Levy
 on November 14, 2009 #
 
Yeah, the takedown sender does have to declare, under penalty of perjury, that they own the copyright to the work in question (authorized to act on behalf of the copyright owner, to be precise).
 
If Kwaze-Kwasa sent a takedown notice over publicly-available IRS information, and you have a good faith belief that they made a mistake or misidentification of the material, then feel free to counter-swear. And try to get them into court if you can. They can explain to a judge why they committed perjury.
 
And yes, if the ISP wants to remain non-liable under section 512, they do need to wait at least 10 business days (and not more than 14) after your counter-notice before they restore the material in question. Yep, its a horrible law.
 
http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/17/usc_sec_17_00000512000-.html
 
To be effective under this subsection, a notification of claimed infringement must be a written communication provided to the designated agent of a service provider that includes substantially the following: [] A statement that the information in the notification is accurate, and under penalty of perjury, that the complaining party is authorized to act on behalf of the owner of an exclusive right that is allegedly infringed.
 
http://yro.slashdot.org/story/05/11/24/133226/DMCA-Abuse-Widespread
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on November 14, 2009 #
 
Hi Aaron,
If you had read the feedback we posted on your site youd know what law you were breaking by publishing the information. You ignored our friendly request to remove one part of the information that may not be freely published. When you did not respond to feedback on your site, calls to the telephone number you provide, and e-mails; you left us, on the advice of the IRS  fraud department (who will be contacting you as well), no option but to issue a take down request. When you receive a copy of the DMCA letter or peruse your feedback you will know what the problem is it is very clearly stated  or contact us  we friendly and only did DCMA as a last resort and did swear under perjury what the problem is.
 
posted by Rob
 on November 14, 2009 #
 
You only have to swear that youre the copyright holder, you dont have to swear that you think the copyrighted material was infringed. So I can takedown your website for it copying my blog and all I have to do is swear that I hold the copyright to my blog, I dont have to swear that I think you copied it.
 
Rob: Please show me something that says employer identification numbers are private information. The IRS puts them all online! Are you going to threaten the IRS too?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 15, 2009 #
 
We are working with the IRS  they do not publish SSN or EIN  publish means anyone can view  no one can go to the IRS website and view SSN or EIN information. You are downloading or searching the files they make availble for the public to check the credentials of any public nonprofit and then re-publishing that information for anyone to view. The IRS confirms and states to us that is illegal  as we said before we have no qualms about you publishing all the information except for the EIN as we have no business relationship and have not given you the information or the permission to publish it and neither has the IRS. I dont believe you have any malicious intent towards us but many cyber criminals out there are forever phishing and setting up scams  we are trying to be good citizens in protecting ourselves and others against fraud that could be done in our name using our EIN. We will protect and enforce our rights not to have our EIN published by a third party.
 
posted by Rob
 on November 15, 2009 #
 
Im not sure what convoluted law this Rob has in mind, but I can tell that he is confused.
 
He seems to be confused because in one sentence he says publish means anyone can view  he even confirms that the IRS makes EIN-containing files availble [sic] for the public  and then goes on to accuse Aaron of re-publishing that information for anyone to view.
 
Rob seems to have already admitted that the information is already available to the public, and that the IRS has already published it for anyone to view. I guess well leave the legal questions up to the lawyers, but in commonsense terms, its easy to see that Rob is the one blowing smoke here.
 
posted by JeffMo
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Rob, I dont think you understand. All anyone has to do is download this file:
http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/eo_co.exe
 
which includes all of the EINs for employers in Colorado.
 
Then they can search for KWAZE-KWASA to find this line:
http://pastebin.com/f73eaa1c3
 
This information is already public, and definitely not copyrightable.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Robs clueless.
 
Publish, verb transitive: \
1.  To prepare and issue (printed material) for public distribution or sale.
2. To bring to the public attention; announce.
 
no one can go to the IRS website and view SSN or EIN information.
 
Except Im on the IRS website and viewing the EIN information for my former employers THIS VERY MOMENT, plus MY OWN BUSINESS. Are you blind, or stupid? EINs are public and printed directly on your tax returns, fool. Anybody could dig thru the trash and find out a companys EIN.
 
The IRS is stupid, youre stupid, and this bullshit needs to stop. If it doesnt stop, Im going to make it stop, and when I had to go up against Electronic Arts to get the bullshit to stop, THEY PAID A HEAVY PRICE.
 
You want to dance, I hope youre prepared to do the devils tango. Your lawyers are just fresh meat to me.
 
posted by Alex McQuown
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
Im curious the information about the non-profit group Kwaze-Kwasa (USA) Inc. Did you find their filing for non profit status questionable?
 
What does the group do that drew your attention?
 
Other than send take down letters - what are they invovled with?
 
posted by Dakota Harrison
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
@Rob - yes they do publish EIN information. You also neglected to respond to the link Aaron provided. Additionally, this information has been posted to wikileaks (not by me, but easily found searching kwaze-kwasa)- good luck getting it removed by them.
 
posted by Cabe
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
The IRS confirms and states to us that is illegal
 
Really? I would like that IRS agents name, please. They obviously are not fit for their job if they do not know basic information like that.
 
posted by Alex McQuown
 on November 30, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November  3, 2009
 
Title: The Logic of Google Ads
 
When should you buy ads? Lets assume your goal is for people to click on the ads and give you money. (Reasons this may not be true: persuasion, brand-building, budget-maximizing.) The return from a block of ads is thus revenue - marginal_costs - ad_costs. Ads are an investment like any other; you keep buying them until your return on investment (revenue - marginal_costs / ad_costs) equals your cost of capital (usually the interest rate).
 
For simplicity, well assume your marginal cost is zero. (My marginal cost is almost always zero, so this doesnt strike me as too unrealistic.) So how do you estimate revenue? You can track how much money people who click on your ad give you, but this has two flaws. First, customers often give you more money over time. Maybe they buy level one of your video game when they click on the ad, but then they may buy levels two and three the next day after they beat level one. The future is always in the future, so revenue-per-user numbers may be too small.
 
Second, they might have given you money anyway. Your video game ads probably run on video game review sites, where readers might buy your game just from the review, even if you hadnt bought an ad. So your revenue numbers may be too big.
 
But these problems arent so serious. In the first case, the worst that happens is you dont buy as many ads as you should. In the second, you dont actually lose money, its just that some extra profit you could have kept has gone into ads.
 
Lets turn to the ad seller. They probably want to maximize how much they charge per ad impression (CPM). (Reasons this may not be true: unseemly ads.) A good way to do this is to hold an auction. Its impractical to have everyone bid live, so Google auctions work like eBay auctions: you enter the maximum youre willing to pay and get charged just enough to beat the other bidders. (One can think of this as a computer-simulated auction where everyone keeps bidding up the price by pennies until they hit the maximum theyre willing to spend.)
 
But what are you bidding on? Ad sellers want to maximize revenue per impression, but ad buyers want to maximize profit per expense. In an ideal world, ad sellers auction off impressions (this is what Google Ad Manager does) while ad buyers bid per dollar of profit (entering their cost of capital).
 
Determining how much profit you make from an ad is hard. Can we just trust you? Lets say you make $2 in profit per 1000 impressions and everyone else makes $1. Now you can lie and say you make $1 in profit and then pay twice as much per profit-dollar. Now you pay the same amount as before, but you win all the profit-dollar auctions. Now thats not wrong  youre clearly making more money than the other bidders, so you should win  but your bid isnt cost-per-profit anymore, its cost-per-impression.
 
What if you paid based on revenue? Verifying revenue is difficult, but Google could do it if everyone was using Google Checkout. (If you sent some of your users to a non-Google Checkout system, Google could catch you and fine you.) Google offers nicer ads to Checkout users, but they still dont have much market share, making this system impractical at present.
 
Some search engines apparently had cost-per-action (CPA) auctions, where you paid based on how many people actually bought things. I have no idea how they made that work, since lying about how many people took an action seems really profitable and easy. Maybe thats why no one does this anymore.
 
That just leaves cost-per-click (CPC). Cost-per-click seems ideal, since its verifiable by both the ad seller (who uses a redirect link to track clicks) and the ad buyer (who sees the users show up on their page). Its a nice half-way point between buyer and seller.
 
So the ad seller holds an auction for CPC and multiplies CPC by click-thru-rate (CTR) to calculate CPM. They shows the highest CPM ads, charging each the bidder below thems CPC, times their relative CTRs. (In reality, Google doesnt just use CTR; they also factor in the relevance of the ad and the quality of the page it goes to.) And, voila: weve derived the basics of an online ad system.
 
This works out great for the ad seller  they maximize CPM, just like they wanted  but the ad buyer is still stuck converting their ROI into CPC. The ad buyer, recall, wants to increase their spending on ads (now determined to be CPC) until their return on investment equals their cost of capital.
 
It seems like this should be pretty easy, and indeed Google does provide tools to calculate ROI, but apparently not to optimize it. What they do provide is a tool to optimize your cost-per-action.  Does anyone know why this is?
 
It seems like an automatic ROI optimizer would lead many people to spend more money on ads. Its hard to believe Google is leaving all that money on the table.
 
But Google does intelligently optimize the ads themselves. The variance in click-thru rates between different ads is huge  its not uncommon to see two very similar ads, but one gets ten times as many clicks as the others. Google lets you put in as many ads as you like and automatically rotates them, showing ads with better CTRs more often.
 
So far weve just had a single ad seller. In the real world, lots of people want to sell ads and lots of people want to buy them. How do you match them up?
 
One option is make the buyer choose. This is how Google Search works: Google holds an auction for each search query and buyers pick which ones they want to compete in. Another is to group related websites together and run ads evenly across all of them. This is how most smaller ad networks work. And then theres AdSense. AdSense scans a page for relevant keywords, then runs the Google Search ads that won auctions for those keywords.
 
Google also knows a lot about ad viewers. By tracking what web pages you visit, they know what topics youre interested in. Im apparently interested in Unix, the environment, elections, government, and social science, so Google prefers to show ads on those subjects to me.
 
But theres another way to think about ad matching: as a giant optimization problem. Which combinations of user, ad placement, and advertisement optimize click-thru rates (or, ultimately, ROI)?
 
For each of these, there are lots of variables. For each user, you know their history, geographical location, computer (browser, operating system, screen size), ISP, etc. For each ad placement, you know time of day, hosting website,  page content, etc. And for each ad, there are numerous possible variations in phrasing and design that can be tested, as mentioned before.
 
The possible combinations are infinite. You cant test all of them, so you need to come up with ones that are plausible. You can look at which combinations worked in the past: has this ad done significantly better in some cities than others, or at some times than others? And you can look for patterns across ads: do ads that do well on CNN also do well on MSNBC? These hypotheses can then be tested and, if they work, you start running ads more there.
 
Netflix claims theyve made millions from slight improvements in their movie recommendations.1 When they offered a prize for more, researchers found thousands of tiny patterns and came up with all sorts of innovative algorithms to try to get an edge. After 32 months, researchers doubled the algorithms effectiveness.
 
Imagine how much more is at stake for Google. Last year, they received $21 billion in ad revenue, of which 60% was apparently profit. Even tiny improvements would be worth the highest salaries  a 0.004% improvement would make $500,000. Doubling it would create unspeakable wealth.
 
Yet Google has no contest for improving ad click-thru rates. Indeed, press reports suggest they dont even have an internal team working on it. The AdWords user-interface (recently redesigned from jaw-droppingly wretched to just wretched) would seem to suggest they dont do this kind of optimization at all. Their blog asks people to optimize things manually. No doubt there are some things humans (even ad purchase reps) can do better than computers, but surely theres a lot more they can do together  with humans giving the machine additional hints and hypotheses to test. But there doesnt seem to be anything like that.
 
Its hard to believe this is true. Its hard to believe this can last.
 
Googles chief economist claims that Googles sewn up the ad market by being better than everyone else. What if you made an ad network that was better than Google?
 
Right now Google takes a 20% cut of every auction price. What if you were willing to take just 10%? You could give ad sellers a slightly higher CPM  theyd gladly run your ads when they paid more and Googles the rest of the time. Then you can offer ad buyers a slightly lower CPC. As long as the money people made was more than the cost of setting things up, theyd switch. Im actually not sure why this hasnt happened.
 
Now imagine that you were a genius CS student who could come up with a better ad optimization algorithm. Your system would have a higher overall CTR, since it presented users with better ads. This means that, again, you can pay higher CPMs (since more people click per impression). And you can redirect some of the money you would spend on higher CPMs into lower CPCs, to attract advertisers.
 
But to develop the algorithms and do the optimization you need the data. Lots of it  lots of users, lots of advertisers, lots of ad spots. No startup will ever have that; its only left to Google (or whichever giant eventually replaces them).
 
Im not normally one to be too concerned about improving Googles bottom line (they seem to be doing alright), but as an ad buyer Im frustrated I have to do this work myself. Id rather solve the problem for everyone. And if Google wants to pay me for that, I certainly wouldnt mind.
 
Its weird that Netflix is so much more interested in this than, say, Amazon. Amazon makes money on every sale, whereas Netflix loses money every time they send a DVD out. Netflix claims they make up for this in higher customer retention rates, but why didnt Amazon think of this first?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  3, 2009
 
I dont really understand what you mean by saying that Google doesnt try to optimize click through rates. Thats why it considers historical CTR as part of the auction process. And Im sure many other user/placement-specific factors go in to determining which ads to show for a particular query or web page. You seem to be saying is that Google should come up with new ads or keywords for the publishers or automating it to the point that they dont have to do that stuff anymore? They already do actually do all of the above things. Incidentally, I believe CPA is in use on Google but that you have to be a trusted advertiser before you can use it :).
 
posted by Anon
 on November  3, 2009 #
 
I think Googles reasoning behind manual ad creation and keyword choice is very justifiable. Its this ideology that has created the competitive enviorment that allows all bussineses (not just the ones with big pockets) to be able to build a competitive edge.  Its part of their philosophy and its what has made them so succesful.  Yahoo attempted this and they got baught out.  Another important notion is the fact that no computer or computerized data (currently) is capable of understanding and producing ads better than a business that has the creativity and motivation to succeed. I also advertise with Google and have found that ideology to be very successful for me.
 
posted by Zohrab
 on November  4, 2009 #
 
Just to be clear, the winning bidder pays the second highest bid + 1 cent (this is to avoid winners curse) (its also more complicated due to Google showing multiple ads etc., etc.).
 
posted by friism
 on November  4, 2009 #
 
A great post and lots of valid points. I dont doubt that if a better system were to be made though that it could still eclipse google. After all they once were just a few blokes in a lucky situation. Certainly it remains a wild west in a lot of respects and with the billions poured in each year you would think a few million would go into the ultimate ad matching system (not that Googles system is BAD BAD at this.) The talk of Niche and long tail in recent years proved that theres still a ton of juice left further down the tail and now people are targeting better. I think in the end Google thought of a good format and its making them so much they probably dont want to touch it, because $21 billion is still $21 billion. I wouldnt be suprised if they push newer / seperate options as it could be a more sensible progression for THEM.
 
This of course is not what us end user display buyers and sellers want but thats life!
 
posted by Woody
 on November  4, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November  3, 2009
 
Title: Election Ballot 2009
 
I hope that you all vote today if you can.
 
As the left gained power, many cities switched to off-year elections and non-partisan candidacy. Removing party affiliations from the ballot servers as a kind of poll tax, it forces people to spend time researching each candidate individually instead of just knowing they support a particular party. For those in Cambridge, MA, I have tried to help out by doing the research for you.
 
Cambridge has the additional complication of having a decent voting system, so you can list your candidates in order of preference. There are two questions on the ballot. For city council, there seem to be three basic categories: People with good ideas, people with no ideas, and people with bad ideas. I have listed them in that order:
 
School issues are inevitably depressing. Everyone says they oppose the achievement gap and so on, so my first test was to see how people felt about standardized tests (ordered from opposition to support):
 
Happy Election Day!
 
UPDATE: The winners were (in order): 9, 14, 15, 20, 5, 18, 19, 13, 21. And: 4, 3, 1, 8, 5, 2.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  3, 2009
 
As a Cantabrigian, I appreciate this very much. 
Thanks, Aaron.
 
posted by Paul Irish
 on November  3, 2009 #
 
Ha!  Charlie Stead was my tight ship principal.  I think he might be more of a sweetie than his platform would reveal.
 
posted by Anne
 on November  4, 2009 #
 
Heres a good object lesson in why we use representative democracy, and not ballot initiatives, to govern our cities.
 
Youve attempted to reduce each candidate to one or two planks. You give no account of their competence, their political capital, their experience, the practicability of their proposed solutions, the costs and offsetting revenues, or of the host of other factors that intervene between admirable intentions and concrete accomplishments.
 
To take two examples off your list: Larry Ward supports inclusionary zoning. Good for him. Hes an uncommonly nice guy, and well intentioned. But after falling into a seat on the council through a resignation, hes accomplishednothing. He chairs the university relations committee, and it met - once, back in May. He introduced a resolution then calling for an annual report on ties between higher education and public education in the city - it passed, and theres been not a peep since. And he supported inclusionary zoning back before he was on the council - a year later, hes done nothing to implement it.
 
On the other end of the spectrum, theres David Maher. You rightly point to some elements of his program that are objectionable - although saying he supports segregation is needlessly hyperbolic and mildly slanderous. But the guys also the resident technocrat on the council - the member most inclined to busy himself with the fiscal minutiae of government. With Murphy gone, there isnt another another sitting member of the council with either the inclination or the evident skill to parse these sorts of issues. Thats a broader problem with the batch of councillors, but it also means theres much more to Maher than a couple of issues - particularly since were talking about the council, not the school committee. I wouldnt rank him first, but hes a long way from last.
 
And then theres Kathy Podgers - your eight pick. Kathy is nuts. Shes got a monomaniacal focus on a single issue - the rights of the disabled - and pushes it in a manner that discards civility. That can be a valuable trait in an activist, but would effectively guarantee her isolation on the council, a body that requires five votes to accomplish anything.
 
Politics is about people as much as it is about issues. People change their minds in office; issues evolve; other factors mediate the ability of officials to implement their agendas. You might like Podgers stated positions on the issues, but I cant think of a more effective way to undermine their advancement than making her their leading advocate on the council. You might like Wards commitments, but his apparent inability to follow through has got to count. You might dislike Mahers stands on certain flashpoints, but I, for one, respect his diligence, and would hate to imagine the council without someone like him on it.
 
Theres more to elections than ideas.
 
posted by Cynic
 on November  5, 2009 #
 
Yep. Unfortunately, I dont have this kind of detailed information about people  I just have their platforms. So you should start a blog and tell us this stuff so that we can make better decisions.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November  6, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: October 19, 2009
 
Title: Subjectivism
 
I have two friends  lets call them Q and R  whose political philosophy I find alien and fascinating. Like me, they genuinely want to help the poor but, like conservatives, they object to most typical solutions for doing so. (And yes, I know conservatives claim they want to help the poor, but it usually turns out that there are other things they think are more important. Not so with Q and R.)
 
Q thinks the most important thing is how it feels to be poor. The problem isnt so much that they dont have money, but that theyre made to feel bad because of it. Welfare is thus a bad idea because it just makes the poor feel worse  not only can they not make money, but they have to come hat-in-hand to the government for help. My first reaction to this was that the poor were wrong: it wasnt their fault they were poor, they were just the losers in a rigged game. But, of course, they dont know the game is rigged and things they dont know cant make them feel better. By focusing on the objective facts, Q argues, were ignoring the actual lived experiences of the poor.
 
Q is thus upset by socialist writers, like Orwell (Down and Out in Paris and London, The Road to Wigan Pier) and Ehrenreich (Nickel and Dimed, Bait and Switch), who attempt to get the reader to imagine what it would be like if they were poor. Because this is just another way of getting the reader to focus on the objective situation. In all probability, the reader will not be poor ands thus the question of what it would be like is irrelevant; whats important is what it would be like for the actual poor and that requires talking to them.
 
R also objects to welfare policies, but on rather different grounds. R starts from the premise that people are bad at making themselves happy. Well-to-do professionals, who seem so much better off than the poor, may not actually be doing that much better. To continue to live in the style to which theyve become accustomed, they must work long hours at a job they dislike. Because of the endowment effect, getting off this treadmill would cause them even more pain. A few lucky people earn money at tasks they find fulfilling, but perhaps not many more than are happy being poor.
 
Welfare  or, indeed, any proposal to improve the objective situation of the poor  is a bad idea in Rs view because it simply makes it harder for them to get off the treadmill. One might think the right response to this is what we might call (with apologies to Thaler) a kind of utilitarian paternalism, where the government steps in and shows people how to be happy. But why would the government know how to be happy? Having a satisfied life is a cultural problem, R argues, and the solution lies in non-governmental steps to reform culture.
 
I find these arguments interesting because they start from rather inarguable premises (what matters is how it feels to be poor, people dont know the best way to make themselves happy) to draw very frustrating conclusions.
 
Take Q. Corporate profits (and thus employee pay) depend on how much of a monopoly the company has. Even the secretary at Google is a millionaire, while even the owner of a farm is desperately poor. Theres no way to make a company in a competitive market pay more because there just isnt more money to pay. But getting rid of competitive markets seems like a bad idea; competition has clearly made our lives better. But if we want to make things better for those who arent paid well (and lets just say we do, since thats kind of the basic premise of this whole article), that just leaves transferring money from those who have it to those who dont. Which, according to Q, doesnt make anyone feel better.
 
Other countries seem to deal with this by designing the money so that money isnt transferred directly, but is spent on universally available public services. Its not that the French poor get given money they can spend on health care, its that in France health care is free to everyone. Poor people dont feel singled out and aidedeveryone uses government health care. (And the wealthy are much less likely to vote against programs they themselves use.)
 
This also goes some way to addressing Rs objection: people arent being given more money to spend how they see fit, theyre being given access to services we expect to make them happy. And the access doesnt ever go away, so it doesnt contribute to the endowment effect.
 
Even so, R would argue, much of these universal services are things like education which make it so that a broader group of people can sign up to work at rat race jobs and thus get on the unhappy treadmill. Why support policies that bring more people into this unhappy system? (R also happens to think schooling is bad on its own terms, as is health care, but I dont think thats necessary for the argument.)
 
But a tax for service system compresses the whole wage structure. The wealthy earn less money, because they pay some of it in taxes, and thus dont have as far to fall. And the poor get more services, which means that even if the wealthy do lose their job and fall, they dont fall as far, since the floor has been raised. All of this would seem to make it easier to quit a job you dont like. (Egads, Im mixing metaphors like Thomas Friedman. Falling off a treadmill to services on a higher floor?) Indeed, in the extreme case, services would be so high you wouldnt have to work at all unless you wanted to. (Whether this extreme is economically feasible is a separate discussion.)
 
So thats what Im for: democracy within organizations, transfers between organizations, and structuring the rules of the market to maximize social benefit. Oh, and euthanasia of the rentier.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 19, 2009
 
I liked the structure of this essay a lot. I have conservative tendencies at times and this is one the more convincing arguments Ive heard for social services.
 
I do believe that it would decreases the total economic output of a society, but that really shouldnt be the only metric we use.
 
posted by Alex
 on October 21, 2009 #
 
Wow, what a disconnect. Both of these arguments are modern-day equivalents of let them eat cake.
 
@Q: One might more realistically argue that welfare lets poor people feed their families without selling blow jobs or robbing old ladies. That probably feels pretty good for someone without other options.
 
@R: From the perspective of a spoiled upper middle class kid, sure, college gives you options of rat race jobs [] on the unhappy treadmill. But for people whose parents couldnt afford to pay for an education because they were living paycheck-to-paycheck all their lives, its an opportunity to aspire to a goal greater than paying rent to stay off the street another month.
 
Its simultaneously sad and hilarious watching Q and R discuss what it must feel like to be poor. Ive never experienced it myself, but I dont see why is it so hard for people to get their minds around what it must be like for people to have no financial, personal, or social safety net? That means no parents with extra houses and bedrooms, no MacBook Pros, and no employable skills.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on October 22, 2009 #
 
Andrey Fedorov: Dude, Im poor. Seriously. (I know! Aaron knows a real life poor person! Isnt it weird?) The people selling blow jobs or robbing old ladies arent doing it for food, theyre doing it for drugs. Which we all know. We generally know who they are and what theyre up to because its a good idea to steer clear of them. Also, we know what they do when they get their welfare checks. Boy, does my mom have a fun rant about that. But really, like, if youre not already deeply involved with drugs, its hard to know where to even get started sucking cocks for money. The people doing it are well armed and territorial.
 
For food theres stamps, and generally a list you can get of kitchens, etc, that hand out bags once a week. Walmart is helpful for my mom, and she also has a little back garden where she grows veggies to supplement what produce she can afford. I have a longstanding tradition of going to upscale markets when flat broke and hungry and trying lots of samples, because Im not just poor, Im cheeky. If youre really in need of food cafeterias are awesome. I used to just collect untouched sides and stow them away for later.
 
Another bit of news regarding the rat race: Rs possibly more right than even he knows. Theres a lot of poor people that dont want your awful desk job. Not just because they clearly couldnt do it, being just this side of literate. They like working in the open. They like work ending when they punch a timeclock and getting to be with their friends and family. They like talking to people, touching them, giving them things in their jobs. They like making people happy. They like knowing everything about a simple system in a simple place, becoming part of that. They like that work is just work, their boss is just an asshole, and they dont have to give a fuck about whether theyre productive enough or how the company is doing. A lot of poor people not only dont get any meaning from their work, they dont want any, because they havent fallen for that weird middle and upper class delusion that somehow your job determines your worth as a person. (Some do. I did, but Im pretty sure it didnt do me any good.)
 
The thing that capital S-Sucks about being poor is the constant stressful sense that you are one out-of-your-control incident from falling off the bottom rung of the ladder. Your life is precariously balanced, and youre often only one car accident, one bout of illness, one layoff away from it all falling apart. Sometimes its even less, youre one cold away, or some incomprehensible bit of paperwork away from disaster, or the price of something just went up, or your kid brings home a surprise and you can be fucked by dominos of disaster and you dont know how far youll fall, whether a relative can help slow the fall or what. You dont know if youre going to lose your home, lose your kids chance at school, if youre going to die, go into debt, fall off the wagon, go to jail. That stress makes people crazy, and they respond by doing bad things. Hand a bunch of people totally acclimated to that kind of crazy a bunch of money, they arent going to exactly start researching 401(k)s. I am continually bewildered by people that want to give people that have not only never had any money, but any training in managing money, wads of the dangerous stuff without so much as a suggestion of what to do with it. Its like the one backhoe per child plan. What could possibly go wrong?
 
But if we as a society could take some of those threats away, mitigate them a bit, and maybe help the people with drug and mental illness problems a bit more, let everyone go to the doctor, youd find out something about us poor people. Were really good at this. We know how to band together and help each other, we know how to prioritize, we know how to have fun, and we dont need all of your crap to be happy. It hasnt made you people happy. I kind of live in this class interstitial these days, and Im amazed at how miserable the middle class can make themselves, for, as near as I can tell, no reason at all. Youre always scared, you obsess over really trivial shit, you have no idea how to relax. But you do often know how to balance a checkbook, or set up a household budget. You know what compound interest is, and which side is the business end. We know how to get everyone together to rebuild a car for the grandparents or somesuch. Its unfortunate that class/race/etc walls are so unbreechable in the US, because we really could learn a few things from each other.
 
posted by Q
 on October 23, 2009 #
 
@Q: I find myself agreeing with your comment, although I dont think you (or anyone) can speak for all poor people. More importantly, I dont see how what you say shows that welfare is a bad idea because it just makes the poor feel worse. Yes, right now, people who sell blowjobs/mug old ladies arent doing it because theyre afraid of starving, because we do have very basic forms of welfare in the US - food stamps being one of them.
 
And this is exactly what Im talking about - if conservative rhetoric against the welfare state are realized into law (removing food stamps, housing subsidies, homeless shelters, etc), more people will be forced into prostitution and crime. On the flip side, if we were to grow the welfare state to mitigate the financial threats from healthcare, housing, and education, we would also reduce the number of people doing things they are unhappy with out of necessity.
 
It doesnt upset me when people sell themselves or commit crimes for drugs (or other non-necessities) because thats their choice/risk to make/take. What upsets me is when theyre forced to do what they dont want to (be it actual or corporate prostitution) to provide healthcare, housing, or education for their families. Hence, I see the solution to white collar wage slavery being an expansion of the welfare state - to give people social services that will allow them to leave their desk jobs and find both socially valuable and fulfilling work.
 
This is how successful communities work (Jewish communities come to mind) - they provide social welfare to their members (members know theyll never need to sleep on the street), but encourage education (not just schooling) and creating value for the community.
 
Note how this applies to Rs point about desk jobs as well. Colleges arent only a gateway to schooling and white collar slavery, but to education and capitalism as well (self-employment, small business, etc) . It may be an unconventional position for a capitalist to advocate an extensive welfare system, but thats just what makes sense to me.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on October 23, 2009 #
 
@Q: I just found myself in an argument along the same lines as this one, making the point that theres nothing wrong with being content with being poor, and that people pretentiously assume that low net worth immediately implies misery. So, well done! Not only a year later, Im arguing your points as if they were my own (I did link here when I realized it, of course)!
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on June 24, 2010 #
 
Wow, I am tremendously impressed, especially with the follow up in a comment thread of all places, and thank you.
 
posted by Q
 on June 29, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: October 20, 2009
 
Title: Disciplinary Bubbles
 
Heres another blog post thats long overdue. There seems to be a
surge of interest in the topic lately, so I thought Id write up my
longstanding thoughts.
 
The academy is often thought of as the ideal for developing knowledge:
select the brightest minds in the country, guarantee them jobs, allow
them all the resources they need to research anything, dont interfere
with any of their conclusions. On some issues, these
independent-minded academics form a consensus and we tend to give
their consensus very heavy weight. They cant all be wrong, can they?
 
And yet, in my empirical research, I find they very often are. A short
blog post is no place to do a careful study, but I can mention some
examples. The classic works in industrial relations turn out to be
complete hoaxes, yet theyve dominated the teach of the field for over
half a century. (See Alex Careys book for details.) In political
science, the most respected practioners most famous work shades and
distorts his own findings to support a theory wildly at odds with the
facts. (See Who Really Rules?) The whole field of fMRI studies are so flat-out
ridiculous that journal articles are even making jokes about them.  And, maybe most blatantly today, economics was dominated by a
paradigm that believed substantive unemployment was impossible, despite
that notion having been famously and thoroughly debunked by Keynes and, of course,
reality.
 
How is this possible? I think the key, as in most institutional
studies, is that of the filter. To become a professor of X, one must
first spend several years receiving an undergraduate major in X, then
several more years going to graduate school in X, then perhaps work as
a postdoc or adjunct for a bit, before getting a tenure-track position
and working like mad to make enough of a dent in the field of X to be
seen as deserving of a prominent permanent position. When your time is
called, a panel of existing professors of X passes judgment on your
work to decide if it passes muster. Can you imagine a better procedure
for forcing impressionable young minds to believe crazy things?
 
And so this process forms what I call disciplinary bubbles. Take the
case of industrial relations for a moment. The field was largely
created by the Rockefellers, who wanted research into how they could
get rid of their unions. They paid lavishly and, not surprisingly,
found people who told them what they wanted to hear: that treating
workers nicely made unions unnecessary and companies more efficient.
The studies were completely bogus but the people who conducted them
were hailed as heroes, and provided with lavish funding to continue
their research. The funding started new departments which trained new
proteges, each of whom was taught that the founding studies as
gospel. They were told to work on expanding and refining the results,
not results, not questioning then, and so they did, becoming
industrial relations professors in their own right and continuing the
cycle.
 
Like other bubbles, disciplinary bubbles are difficult to pop. Imagine
you do research outside their incorrect assumptions. Your research
will simply be marginalized and ignored  you dont get into the
conferences or the journals, its just not seen as valid work. And
even if you try to disprove the bogus assumptions, you get ignored.
Everyone already in the field has built their careers on those
assumptions. Theyve long rationalized them to themselves; nobody is
going to support someone who argues their lifes work is built on
sand.
 
Thus ignorance marches on.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 20, 2009
 
I say this with some irony, but this sounds a bit like Bourdieu:
  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Field_(Bourdieu)
 
posted by Joseph Reagle
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
Everything Im about to say is related to engineering, for context.
 
While perhaps this used to be the case, cross disciplinary fertilization, particularly in engineering, is quite evident now.  Though Im not lucky enough to be permanent, folks Ive seen do very well perform research and handle theory that wasnt even taught in a given department 10 years ago, examples being effects of surface tension on self assembly being studied by electrical engineers, biological tailoring by chemical engineers, and mechanical engineers designing complex electrochemical circuits.
 
In fact, those I know that endeavor to simply carry their advisors banner, no matter how big a deal said advisor was, often have trouble getting a job in that field, but if they think laterally an apply the concepts to a problem in a different field often find work.
 
As for momentum, fads come and go, some things stick (AFM, MEMS for research) and some dont (superconductors), and some hang around too long (fuel cells), but this is the case with everything.  Single source funding is probably responsible for prolonging efforts on a given topic, for better or worse, but nothing lasts forever.
 
There are probably one billion things wrong with academia at the moment, and this, as far as I can tell, isnt as generalized as your essay suggests.
 
posted by Dan
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
Im sure there are such disciplinary bubbles; equally, Im sure there are bubbles outside academia (consider management). But I have to say that Ive never encountered one in my own disciplines: doing well there does not depend on repeating accepted pieties; in fact, repeating accepted pieties is usually a rather bad idea.
 
posted by Sam C
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
What? You mean the fields of economics, industrial relations, and political science is full of people so hopeless to get at accurate models of their fields that they form mental-model tribes completely lacking in a realistic basis? Color me not shocked. And do add psychology to that list:
 
http://thelastpsychiatrist.com/2009/10/more_on_amygdala_anxiety_and_m.html
 
I think this is the inevitable and painfully obvious outcome of any field for which we do not possess adequate models. These are the astrologies and alchemies of today - studies of phenomena which so significantly impacts our lives, yet which we have absolutely no mathematical language to deal with, nor mental tools to comprehend.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
Dan: I think the phenomena Aaron is describing is probably inversely proportional to how closely the disciple is tied to uncontroversial empirical measures of success and failure. Paradigmatic cases of uncontroversial empirical measures of success and failure would include such engineering-specific cases as this rocket successfully took off and this bridge hasnt collapsed after ten years of heavy use. The more controversial the measures, the less empirical they are, the looser they are tied to the discipline, the more the likelihood that other factors like founder-effects, wishful thinking, etc. are to swamp truth-tracking, leading to institutional bubbles.
 
Sam C: It seems to me very possible that disciplinary bubbles can coexist with the outward appearance of not repeating accepted pieties.  Practitioners of even the most opaque and wooliest forms of Frenchified post-modernism generally took themselves to be exposing errors of their colleagues and teachers, e.g. finding hidden phallocentrism/heteronormativity lurking even in the teachings of Derrida or Foucault. It does not follow that post-modernism of that sort therefore wasnt a disciplinary bubble. Like in this anecdote from Kierkegaard:
 
Heraclitus the obscure has said: One cannot pass through the same river twice. Heraclitus the obscure had a disciple who did not stop there; he went further and added, One cannot even do it once.
 
posted by Bryan
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
I totally agree with this article. (Joseph: I agree, Engineering has much less of this problem. But the problem does exist in other fields.)
 
I once read an article about how the Phone Company Monopolies are prepetuated by the law schools. (Wish I could remember where I saw it). Basically, some of the professors at prestigious law schools had a hand in the various decisions to create baby bell monopolies. So they taught their students on why this was right, and didnt allow any students to write papers to the contrary. The students grow up and become professors, and still think the decisions are perfect, so they teach their students..
 
posted by Anonymouse
 on October 21, 2009 #
 
What I love about fields like AI and Machine Learning is that they are progressing their field by coming up with new ways to discover, analyze, and use data, and constantly questioning and improving their methods at every step. In my brief stint in this field my data came from all sorts of places: photos of plankton, feedback from motor controllers, sounds from microphones, spike counts from neurons, and more.
 
What was cool as that we constantly revisited our basic assumptions, what are we trying to do, why are we doing it, how are we doing it, etc. Testing the null hypothesis was something you just did, because you are always weary of your tools and your assumptions, (statistical, mechanical, procedural, et al.).
 
I dont see this kind of discipline in most disciplines. What is the biology field equivalent to Cohens Empirical Methods in Artificial Intelligence?  Or how often are sociologists assigning books like van der Vaarts Asymptotic Statistics to their grad students?
 
I think the disciplinary bubbles we should fear most are the undisciplined ones.
 
posted by Joshua Gay
 on October 22, 2009 #
 
To sum up: Institutions tend to replicate themselves. Thats about it, right?
 
Its a valid and important insight (but not a particularly novel one, and leveled by the right at least as often as by the left.) But dont stop there. What conclusions should we draw from this?
 
You couch this insight as a broad-brush indictment of the academy as a flawed model. If youre arguing that the academy is flawed, great. But if youre implying that its useless, that it tends on the whole to perpetuate ignorance, or that its flaws outweigh its virtues, youve lost me.
 
There are two things you can do with this sort of structural critique. The first is to propose an alternate model. I have yet to encounter one that serves better than universities whose faculty possess the basics of academic freedom, though Im all ears. The second is to use the structural critique to propose refinements to the current model that tend to counter the effects of its inherent tendencies. Id love to see you give that a try.
 
Just to get you started, Ill take a couple of stabs at it myself. One solution is to ensure a greater diversity of faculty on dissertation and tenure committees - to deliberately draw in people outside the field. There are flaws here, too - outsiders may lack the technical knowledge to fairly evaluate the work, and their own disciplinary paradigms may predispose them to find fault - yet on the whole, it would be healthy if more academics had to justify their work to people with different backgrounds. Another might be to provide more early-career development funding opportunities in the humanities and social sciences. Giving academics the financial security to spend a few years taking a risk on a new approach, and the time to validate their work, is important; it happens in the sciences, and helps increase the array of approaches to material.
 
What are your ideas? If you see the flaws in the present model, what solutions would you propose that dont introduce greater flaws of their own?
 
posted by 
 on November  5, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: October 19, 2009
 
Title: djb
 

 
I think its time to remind people that D. J. Bernstein is the
greatest programmer in the history of the world.
 
First, look only at the objective facts. djb has written two major
pieces of system software: a mail server and a DNS server. Both are
run by millions of Internet domains. They accomplish all sorts of
complicated functions, work under incredibly high loads, and confront
no end of unusual situations. And they both run pretty much exactly
has Bernstein first wrote them. One bug  one bug!  was found in
qmail. A second bug was recently found in djbdns, but you can get a
sense of how important it is by the fact that it took people nearly a
decade to find it.
 
No other programmer has this kind of track record. Donald Knuth
probably comes closest, but his diary about writing TeX (printed in
Literate Programming)
shows how he kept finding bugs for years and never expected to be
finished, only to get closer and closer (thus the odd version
numbering scheme). Not only does no one else have djbs track record,
no one else even comes close.
 
But far more important are the subjective factors. djbs programs are
some of the greatest works of beauty to be comprehended by the human
mind. As with great art, the outline of the code is somehow visually
pleasing  there is balance and rhythm and meter that rivals even the
best typography. As with great poetry, every character counts  every
single one is there because it needs to be. But these programs are not
just for being seen or read  like a graceful dancer, they move! And
not just as a single dancer either, but a whole choreographed number
 processes splitting and moving and recombining at great speeds,
around and around again.
 
But, unlike a dance, this movement has a purpose. They accomplish
things that need accomplishing  they find your websites, they ferry
your email from place to place. In the most fantastic movies, the
routing and sorting of the post office is imagined as a giant endless
choreographed dance number. (Imagine, perhaps, The Office from
Brazil.) But this is no one-time fantasy, this is how your email
gets sorted every day.
 
And the dance is not just there to please human eyes  it is a dance
with a purpose. Each of its inner mechanisms is perfectly crafted,
using the fewest number of moving parts, accomplishing its task with
the most minimal energy. The way jobs are divided and assigned is
nothing short of brilliant. The brilliance is not merely linguistic,
although it is that too, but contains a kind of elegant mathematical
effectiveness, backed by a stream of numbers and equations that show,
through pure reason alone, that the movements are provably perfect, a
better solution is guaranteed not to exist.
 
But even all this does not capture his softwares incredible beauty.
For djbs programs are not great machines to be admired from a
distance, vast powerhouses of elegant accomplishment. They are also
tools meant to be used by man, perfectly fitted to ones hand. Like a
great piece of industrial design, they bring joy to the user every
time they are used.
 
What other field combines all these arts? Language, math, art, design,
function. Programming is clearly in a class of its own. And, when it
comes to programmers, who even competes with djb? Who else has worked
to realize these amazing possibilities? Who else even knows they are
there?
 
Oddly, there are many people who profess to hate djb. Some of this is
just the general distaste of genius: djb clearly has a forceful,
uncompromising vision, which many misinterpret as arrogance and
rudeness. And some of it is the practical mans disregard for great
design: djbs programs do not work like most programs, for the simple
reason that the way most programs work is wrong. But the animosity
goes much deeper than that. I do not profess to understand it, but I
do honestly suspect at some level its people without taste angry and
frustrated at the plaudits showered on what they cannot see. Great art
always generates its share of mocking detractors.
 
This is not to say that djbs work is perfect. There are the bugs, as
mentioned before, and the log files, which are nothing if not
inelegant, and no doubt djb would make numerous changes were he to
write the software again today. But who else is even trying? Who else
even knows this is possible? I did not realize what great art in
software could be until I read djb. And now I feel dirty reading
anything else.
 
More: You may also be interested in what djb is doing now.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 19, 2009
 
You have obviously never had to admin Qmail on a production system. You mention log files in passing, but this is a seriously issue when debugging issues (which there tends to be lots of).
 
Yes, theres patches to get it to do useful things like logging, RBL lookups and LDAP authentucation. However by the time all thats done, Im pining for Postfix, or hell, even Sendmails M4 config.
 
From a coding and SMTP perspective, it might well be the greatest thing since sliced bread, but I still break out in a sweat if asked to have a look at one of the Qmail servers on our network.
 
posted by Niall Donegan
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
Bernstein says I am aware of four bugs in the qmail 1.0 releases.
 
http://cr.yp.to/qmail/qmailsec-20071101.pdf
 
posted by Maciej Ceglowski
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
Aaron, thanks for putting into words what has needed to be said.  Ive said these things to people before, but perhaps others will respect your expression more than they have mine.
 
posted by Dossy Shiobara
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
I agree with Aaron, and I ran qmail and djbdns on big production sites (as well as small personal ones) for more than a decade.
 
Recently, Ive switched away from both of themand from djbs ezmlm.
 
I switched qmail to postfix, to test a theory that rejection-on-envelope might encourage the dictionary spammers to drop randomname@mydomain.tld from their lists (qmail can bounce or silently discard; bouncing is a waste of time and silent discards suggest that the address is valid, so it should be used again next time).  Yes, there are (or were) crufty patches to qmail for envelope rejection, but it just added to my growing feeling that no matter how great qmail was in 1996 (and most of history since then), email is now a rapidly changing environment, and qmail requires more active management than I am willing to commit.
 
I switched from ezmlm to mailman, which I dont love, but I do appreciate the ability to offer a web interface that lets not-me manage the lists.
 
I switched from djbdns to nsd, which I am happy with.  I dont like the zone file format (blame Vixie, I always do), or explicit serial numbers, but I do like simpler SRV records for jabber, etc.  I chose it because it isnt BIND, the code is clean, it has a small footprint, and a few of the root servers run it.
 
posted by Andrew
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
Am I the only one who thinks this is a parody of DJBs seemingly-constant attitude problem? I dont know him personally, but almost everything Ive ever read of his is surly. He is obviously talented, but he seems to suspect he might be the only one who is.
 
Can anyone find a link where he is excited, or happy, or whimsical?
 
Nobody on reddit or Hacker News seems to take this entry by aaronsw as a joke.
 
posted by ja
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
I find his piece on Russia to be hilarious. And Dear Ms. Tarzian is nothing if not whimsical. But I do suppose both have to be described as surly.
 
Personally, I really like people who are different. Its nice to know theres more than one way to live.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
As I do not know him, I cant say I wouldnt like him. Most of the things he complains about ought to be complained about, and he does a good job documenting them.
 
He is very interesting, and interesting people make life fun.
 
But they are also sometimes ripe for parody. I guess not this time, though.
 
posted by ja
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
 remind people that D. J. Bernstein is the greatest programmer in the history of the world
 
above implies that we knew he was already, no?
(if you are reminding me, that means I knew it at one point and forgot )
 
wouldnt it be best just to write a peice that makes note of his contributions and our appreciation of said contributions rather than making him greatest or world champion software guy or similar title?
 
-g
 
posted by GF
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
And now I feel dirty reading anything else.
 
Really? You actively feel dirty when you read anything else?
 
Why did you need to close the post with such hyperbole?
 
posted by arkx
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
I was a math major at UIC when djb was a newly minted Assistant Professor, and his personality could only be described as relentlessly efficient.  This comes through in his Russian conference anecdote just as well as in his code.  In person, he is actually quite cheerful, but he does not suffer foolishness gladly.
 
Id wager that many of the people above complaining about qmail and djbdns above do not remember what the Internet was like in 1993.  I am a reluctant Postfix user now, but I hate it, because I dont understand it.  I defy anyone to create a milter, for example, and claim that that is superior to djbs more Unix-like design.
 
posted by Lucas
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
arkx: Yes, I do. Its true.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
If you feel dirty when reading anything else, why didnt you ever give me suggestions for improvement on my watchdog.net code? Its not as if I didnt request it. Or did you not read qmail until after that period?
 
I agree that the defect-free-ness of the qmail code is an impressive accomplishent, head and shoulders above any other production software I have heard of; and its minimalism is without peer in my experience. I dont think thats the only axis of goodness in software, though. You might want to mention Curve25519, Bernstein v. United States, and his successful remote timing attack on software implementations of AES.
 
posted by Kragen Javier Sitaker
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
I thought this article was parody too, but the reason was that Ive tried to look through djbs code before and find it utterly incomprehensible in a way that I rarely find anyone elses working code.  I cant fathom what someone means when they describe it as aesthetically pleasing.
 
To sort this out, lets start looking at some.  Heres the main axfr function in djbdns, on google codesearch:
 
http://ur1.ca/dyas
 
There are almost no useful comments.  The function calls itself with slightly different arguments in order to accomplish different things, which is something thats easy for computers to understand and very hard for humans to get their heads around.  The whole thing looks like it was designed for some almost mechanical  not virtual  machine and then hand-translated in C.  The doit() function is defined in several different files in the same source tree, so you cant even refer to it by name unless youre willing to say no I mean the axfr doit() function not the tdlookup doit() function.
 
So, please:  if theres something to like about the aesthetic of this code, someone tell us what it is.  :)
 
posted by Chris Ball
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
Is this post a writing experiment?
 
posted by Joshua Gay
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
Way to mention Salsa20, Chacha, CubeHash and Poly1305-AES.
 
posted by T
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
Re: Chris Ball on axfr function
 
The function doesnt call itself with slightly different arguments. Theres only one call to doit in that file and thats from the main function.
 
djb uses main() to initialize things and then he usually has a doit() function to do the actual function of the program. Theres nothing confusing about it, not unless you find main() confusing as well.
 
I think Aarons post is a bit lofty, but djb is a true master.
 
posted by Hallgrimur H. Gunnarsson
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
This meme of rediscovering unix is becoming more and more popular.
 
posted by Dru Nelson
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
This is ridiculous. The author is obviously just as insane and arrogant as djb himself. If I had written something of this execrable caliber, I would have no option but suicide to preserve the honor of my family.
 
posted by Bradley
 on October 19, 2009 #
 
aaron> Its hard to claim Im new to programming. I did it for over a decade and then retired from it.
 
What? You did a bit of text mangling and it got used by a lot of people. That doesnt mean youve done any complex programming, or that you have any particular skill.
 
Youre the Britney Spears of code, gushing about the Amy Winehouse of mail!
 
posted by steve
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
steve: you clearly havent used web.py or worked with Aaron.
 
Assuming the quote is accurate, though, I dont think a decade is very long.
 
posted by Kragen Javier Sitaker
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
After the first paragraph I assumed this has been written by DJB.
 
posted by Thomas T
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
His piece on Russia mentioned by others just fits into the picture of arrogance. Does he know what hoops people have to jump through when visiting the US? Russia is a poor country. What does he expect from the standard there? (Besides that the US is also not the brightest example in the world.)
 
I dont know him. So I cant tell whether hes really such an arrogant guy, but he really tries hard to make the impression.
 
I found a bug in qmail. It was not exploitable but it was a bug. So if I find one, there are more Im not clever enough to find. But sure: if exploitable is an essential part of the definition of bug.
 
posted by Meikel
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
Gesh why is everyone fussing even if this is some weird attempt at an ego-stroke its nothing we havent seen before :P
 
posted by CodeJustin
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
I for one welcome this tribute to a man unconstrained by engineering notions, unfettered by mere convention.
 
posted by Fitzharrys
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
One bug  one bug!  was found in qmail., said the parrot. There are at least 2 bugs in the default install which prevent qmail from working properly (you may refer to the big-todo patch, and the oversized CNAME lookup/reply patch). Whats the point of authoring software when your ego and arrogance prevent you from patching and updating it?
 
I dont dislike qmail. I dont dislike Dan Bernstein. I do, however, dislike the inaccurate portrayal of qmail as the measure of perfection. Its broken by default, and its logging format is, in my opinion, near useless as compared to other MTAs.
 
posted by idiocy
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
Dear djb  for I will refer to you lovingly by three lowercase letter  Your software is the very essence of perfection, a gently smoldering fiery flame every flicker of which reveals the mysteries of email and DNS and code in general, and so makes me want to write this slathering crapola which has almost singularly invented something I like to call the blogjob. Youre not a programmer  youre a pop star! Youre not a software engineer  youre a god! Your code makes me want to write emails just so they can be surrounded and caressed by your mail server.
 
You might think Im unbalanced or, in some way, not putting the job of a programmer into perspective. But youre wrong! Because finding the ONE, the GREATEST PROGRAMMER IN THE WORLD, is somehow a possible and worthwhile task, and giving you this title means that I might be one step closer to making out with you in the back seat of your 66 Ford Mustang Fastback, or, as I like to call it, the GREATEST CAR IN THE WORLD.
 
I love you,
Fawning Goofball
 
posted by Lockjaw
 on October 20, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: October  5, 2009
 
Title: Wanted by the FBI
 
I got my FBI file today. (Request yours!) As I hoped, its truly delightful. It has only minor redactions for reasons of personal privacy (basically, they deleted agents names and so on). It all started when theactually, Ill let the file tell the story:
 
February 6, from Washington Field to Chicago:
 
UNCLASSIFIED
 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATIoN
 
Precedence: ROUTINE
 
Case ID #: 288A-WF-238343 (Pending)
 
Title: UNSUB(s);
  US COURTS - VICTIM;
  COMPUTER INTRUSION - OTHER
 
Synopsis: To set lead to locate Aaron Swartz.
 
Enclosure(s): Attached is an Accurint Report for Swartz.
 
Details: The U.S. Courts implemented a pilot project offering free access to federal court records through the PACER system at seventeen federal depository libraries. Library personnel maintain login and password security and provide access to users from computers within the library. PACER normally carries an eight cents per page fee, however, by accessing from one of the seventeen libraries, users may search and download data for free.
 
Between September 4, 2008 and September 22, 2008, PACER was accessed by computers from outside the library utilizing login information from two libraries participating in the pilot project. The Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts reported that the PACER system was being inundated with requests. One request was being made every three seconds.
 
[] The two accounts were responsible for downloading more than eighteen million pages with an approximate value of $1.5 million.
 
[] Data that was exfiltrated went to one of two Amazon IP addresses.
 
Investigation has determined that the Amazon IP address used to access the PACER system belongs to Aaron Swartz.
 
The following information was provided for the IP address:
 
Name: Aaron Swartz
    Address: 349 Marshman Avenue, Highland Park, IL 60035
    Telephone: 847-432-8857
 
A search in Accurint and Swartzs personal webpage confirmed this information. Swartzs social security account number is []. The telephone subscriber for telephone number [REDACTED] is [REDACTED].
 
NCIS report for Aaron Swartz was negative. A search for wages for Swartz at the Department of Labor was negative.
 
[]
 
Washington Field Office requests that the North RA attempt to locate AARON SWARTZ, his vehicles, drivers license information and picture, and others, at 349 Marshman Avenue, Highland Park, IL 60035. Since SWARTZ is the potential subject of an ongoing investigation, it is requested that SWARTZ not be approached by agents.
 
February 15, Manassas, VA:
 
Set Lead 1: (Info)
 
[]
 
AARON SWARTZ has a profile on the website LINKEDIN, at www.linkedin.com/in/aaronsw. SWARTZ is listed as a writer, hacker and activist based in the San Francisco Bay Area. SWARTZs education includes Stanford University, Sociology, 2004. SWARTZs experience includes the following:
 
[]
 
SWARTZ has a profile on the website FACEBOOK. His networks include Stanford 08 and Boston, MA. The picture used in his profile was also used in an article about SWARTZ in THE NEW YORK TIMES.
 
SWARTZs personal webpage, www.aaronsw.com, includes a section titled Aaron Swartz: a life time of dubious accomplishments. In 2007, SWARTZ began working full-time as a member of the Long-Term Planning Committee for the Human Race (LTPCHR).
 
February 19, Manassas, VA:
 
On February 17, 2008 [sic], SA [REDACTED] received an email from [REACTED] Administrative Office of the US Courts, with links to two published articles regarding the compromise of the PACER system.
 
On February 12, 2009, [REACTED] published an article in THE NEW YORK TIMES titled An Effort to Upgrade a Court Archive to Free and Easy. For the article, [REDACTED] interviewed [REDACTED] and AARON SWARTZ regarding the compromise of the PACER system.
 
The following information is found in the article: []
 
February 24, Chicago:
 
Synopsis: Lead covered by Chicago North RA
 
Enclosure(s): Illinois DL/ID Image of Swartz and Accurint Vehicle/Residence Reports for Swartz address.
 
Details: Attempted to locate AARON SWARTZ, his vehicles, drivers license information and picture, and others at 349 Marshman Avenue, Highland Park, IL 60035.
 
Successfully located drivers license photo for SWARTZ. Drove by address in an attempt to locate SWARTZ or vehicles related to the residence, but was unsuccessful. House is set on a deep lot, behind other houses on Marshman Avenue. This is a heavily wooded, dead-end street, with no other cars parked on the road making continued surveillance difficult to conduct without severely increasing the risk of discovery. However, divers license and Accurint information lists address above. Other family members are listed as current residents and four vehicles are currently registered to Susan Swartz who resides at above address. Illinois database checks for SWARTZ yielded negative results. SWARTZ has no arrests, no registered vehicles or property.
 
Chicago considers this lead covered.
 
March 9, Manassas, VA:
 
AARON SWARTZ posted a weblog titled NYT Personals [on February 13 AS] at http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog. In the weblog, SWARTZ quotes the NEW YORK TIMES article in which he was interviewed. SWARTZ also posts Want to meet the man behind the headlines? Want to have the F.B.I. open up a file on you as well? Interested in some kind of bizarre celebrity product endorsement? Im available in Boston and New York all this month.
 
March 23, Manassas, VA:
 
On March 10, 2009, [REDACTED] of THE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE US COURTS (US COURTS) provided the following information:
 
[] When asked to clarify how a user knows what constitutes unauthorized access and how a user would have known that they had to be in one of the seventeen libraries to access PACER, [REDACTED] had [REDACTED] prepare a response.
 
[REDACTED] provided the following information:
 
AARON SWARTZ would have known his access was unauthorized because it was with a password that did not belonged to him.
 
April 14, Manassas, VA
 
On 04/14/2009, SA [REDACTED] called (847) 432-8857 in an attempt to speak to AARON SWARTZ. A female answered the telephone and stated that SWARTZ was not available [] SA [REDACTED] left a message for SWARTZ to return her call and the female stated that she would email that message to SWARTZ.
 
SWARTZ called SA [REDACTED] and left a message on her voicemail stating he could be reached at []. This number is a T-Mobile cellular number and returned negative results in Telephone Applications.
 
SA [REACTED] spoke to SWARTZ, at telephone number [], and explained that the FBI is looking for information on how SWARTZ was able to compromise the PACER system so that the US COURTS could implement repairs to the system and get PACER running again. SWARTZ stated that he would have to talk to his attorney first and would call SA [REDACTED] back at a later time.
 
April 16, Manassas, VA:
 
On 04/16/2009, SA [REDACTED] returned a telephone call to ANDREW GOOD, (617) []. GOOD is AARON SWARTZs attorney in Boston, MA. GOOD wanted assurance that if SWARTZ was interviewed, what he said would not be used to jeopardize him. SA [REDACTED] explained that assurance could not be given but that we were in an information gathering phase. GOOD refused the interview without the assurance.
 
April 20, Washington Field Office:
 
CASE ID #: 288A-WF-238943 (Closed)
 
[]
 
CCIPS Attorney [REDACTED] closed the offices case. Based on the CCIPS closing, Washington Field is closing this case as of this communication.
 
Ive just sent away for the CCIPS file.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October  5, 2009
 
This is so badass.
 
posted by Bob Lee
 on October  5, 2009 #
 
Holy molyThis is awesome. How did you get the file?
 
posted by Adrian Holovaty
 on October  5, 2009 #
 
Ah, I see you just added the link to the request form. Very cool.
 
posted by Adrian Holovaty
 on October  5, 2009 #
 
What was the turn around time for you to get your file?  I want to get mine but Ill only be back in the states for 6 weeks this christmas.
 
posted by 
 on October  5, 2009 #
 
I got the notice that they received it August 10, it came in the mail a couple days ago. You could ask them to deliver it to a friend.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October  5, 2009 #
 
Cool! And note its a very good thing you have (lawyer) friends in high places, so its an amusing blog post rather than literally a Federal case.
 
Definitely a situation of dont-try-this-at-home for the casual reader.
 
(this == what prompted the file, not getting the file).
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on October  5, 2009 #
 
PACER system was being inundated with requests. One request was being made every three seconds.
 
I got a good laugh out of that one. I guess they werent expecting much of a user base for the system.
 
posted by Jeff Kubina
 on October  6, 2009 #
 
From the FBI FOIA request site:
If your request is for information concerning an organization, business, investigation, historical event, or incident, you may submit your request online.
FBI link: http://foia.fbi.gov/foia_request.htm
 
I thought it might be interesting to send a request for Wired but I vainly tried filling out the online form with both Firefox and IE8.  Maybe its just me.  Im probably lacking the critical skills that the FBI agents possess.
 
Heres the mail address one needs for the FOIA request:
 
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Record Information/Dissemination Section
170 Marcel Drive
Winchester, VA 22602-4843
 
posted by Patrick Cotter
 on October  6, 2009 #
 
I dont really understand the need to undergo the pacer project. Its a trivial expense not exactly designed to source of government profit.. why would they make the records publicly available at libraries. I have a pacer account and I can tell you the info you get from it is pretty dull and not at all hidden from the public. Im sure you could have made pacer available for free if you just wrote your congressman rather than accessing the open terminals the way you did.
 
posted by omar
 on October  6, 2009 #
 
@Patrick Cotter
 
No, it wasnt your fault  the FBI online entry form at http://foia.fbi.gov/foia_request.htm is a fake page.
 
It has a SEND button at the bottom, but if you look at the HTML, theres nothing to fill out  the underlined areas are just that; text underlines.  Theres no fields to fill out.
 
I really dont know if this is just a really bad joke or a really, really bad web programmer. :\
 
posted by cappy
 on October  6, 2009 #
 
@cappy: The text at the very top of the page:
Complete, print, sign, notarize, and mail form
 
Its deliberate.
 
Why they dont just save it as a PDF, though. :S
 
posted by lucjon
 on October  6, 2009 #
 
NCIS report for Aaron Swartz was negative. A search for wages for Swartz at the Department of Labor was negative.
 
Dude, you need to find a job or pay your taxes.  You dont want to screw around with the IRS.
 
posted by calvis
 on October  6, 2009 #
 
Maybe he hasnt really worked yet, so why would he declae anything if he never even got a job, probably lives in his mothers basement still.
 
posted by anynomous
 on October  6, 2009 #
 
Wow, reads like a Stasi (East German Ministry for State Security) report. Well, the term Homeland Security isnt that much different to State Security anyway, props to Dubya that the US got an org like the East German one, it was sorely lacking.
 
Waves to the Gestapo
 
posted by Bob
 on October  6, 2009 #
 
Youre my hero.
 
posted by Wilkinson
 on October  6, 2009 #
 
Wow! The article does now say if, or how much, it costs to request ones file from the FBI. I know Ive got one, because the Director of the FBI once had me picked up and taken for a ride in Seattle. I had predicted that the Unabomber would turn out to be a mathematician, based on my linguistic analysis of the Unabomber Manifesto. Anyway, it is very noble to write a Perl script and put $1.5M worth of court documents up on the Amazon cloud. Makes we want to learn Perl to do artificial intelligence. Good-bye for now and good luck foerever!
 
posted by Mentifex
 on October  6, 2009 #
 
There is a PDF version (that you can enter text for most of the fields) located at http://foia.fbi.gov/privacy_request.pdf
 
posted by Rick Mason
 on October  6, 2009 #
 
I dont think the Stasi were really in the habit of letting East Germans consult with their lawyers before being interviewed and then respecting the lawyers decision not to have their client speak.
 
posted by Marshall Smith
 on October  7, 2009 #
 
Your tax dollars at work.  thanks for the laugh!
 
pixel.
 
posted by Eric Vitiello
 on October  7, 2009 #
 
Dumbfuck Marshall Smith, still imagines his shit hole of a country isnt third world. Please excercise your second amendment rights and have a firearms accident in your stupid face.
 
posted by ....
 on October  7, 2009 #
 
Yeah, because everyone is trying to LEAVE the USA, not enter it
 
Must not be so terrible after all.
 
posted by ...
 on October  7, 2009 #
 
I was wondering if you can let me know how to purchase an Amazon IP
 
kthnxbi
 
posted by Kyle Sharpe
 on October  7, 2009 #
 
Kyle: Im assuming it was through EC2. Its gotten pretty easy to set up, I think.
 
posted by Adam
 on October  7, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September 22, 2009
 
Title: A Summary/Explanation of John Maynard Keynes General Theory
 
With the recent economic crisis, there has been much talk of John Maynard Keynes and his economics. Keynes, the story goes, figured out the causes of the Great Depression and in doing so revolutionized the field of economics. Some conservative economists have forgotten or ignored his work, but society as a whole remembers his basic discovery: you get out of downturns by spending money.
 
Reading Keynes General Theory of Employment, Money, and Interest then is a sobering experience. For the book is, indeed, truly brilliant, a definite work of genius. Its the best book on the economy Ive ever read; indeed, its one of the best books Ive ever read. Everyone has seen bits and pieces of wit quoted from the book, but Keynes weaves them into a beautiful tapestry that explains the whole of the modern economy. And yet, the book is a necessary now as it was then: economics has not learned a single one of his lessons.
 
This is a depressing thought, especially since Keynes throughout seems optimistic that once hes explained everything so clearly, economics will be back on the right track. But politics has triumphed over logic and weve forgotten all the crucial things he explained.
 
Perhaps this is why it has a reputation for being a very tough book  so difficult that even economists cant follow it. But I think this is entirely due to a difference in philosophies: the General Theory was the first book on economics I could really understand. And thats because, unlike most economics books, it makes sense  the theories it proposes comport with the real world, instead of taking place in some fantasyland of perfect competition.
 
Still, the book isnt exactly a smooth read. Keynes uses some archaic language and is trying to communicate some complicated ideas. Theres no math, but theres still a lot to chew on. So I thought Id try my best at an explanation/summary. Its a long book, so if youre in a hurry, you might prefer my shorter summary of the fundamental ideas.
 
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money [full text]
 
1: This chapter cheekily consists of a single paragraph. It says the book is an attempt to show that classical economics (basically that summarized by Alfred Marshall, including Ricardo, Mill, Edgeworth, and Pigou) addresses only a special case of the economy, while this book outlines a more general theory.
 
2: The classical theory of employment says the labor market is just another market: people get paid what they make and people only work if they get paid enough to make it worth it. Since it seemed unlikely that society had run out of money-making jobs, it was assumed that unemployment was caused either by people not knowing where the jobs were (frictional unemployment) or insisting on being paid more than they could make (voluntary unemployment).
 
It seems difficult to explain the high unemployment of the Great Depression this way, but economists didnt see how it could be otherwise. So their solution was simple: to end unemployment, people just needed to be willing to work for less.
 
What this amounts to is Says Law: supply creates its own demand. If there are people around willing to work, jobs will spring up to make use of them. If people are unemployed, it must be because theyre refusing to take the job.
 
There are two obvious problems with this. First, people may refuse to work for a lower nominal wage when theyll accept working for a lower real (i.e. inflation-adjusted) wage. That is, if management decides to pay people $4 an hour instead of $5, people might go on strike, but nobody ever goes on strike demanding a raise because the cost of milk has gone up. (So inflation might actually be a better solution than wage cuts.)
 
Second, if wages go down, then the cost of making things goes down, which means that prices go down, which means that in real terms wages end up staying about the same.
 
Keynes has found a crack in the classical theory. The first half of this book will be dedicated to prying it open. The second half is filling it in.
 
3: When people get money, they spend some of it  but not all of it. And businesses choose whether to hire people based on how much they expect to sell. But how much they sell is exactly dependent on how much people spend.
 
So its how much people spend that determines employment. But this is totally consistent with there being unemployment  if people arent buying, businesses arent selling, so they fire people (who then buy less).
 
Indeed, this problem will be worse in richer countries, since the more people make the less of it they need to spend and thus less money is used to hire people. (The details of how the remainder gets invested has to do with interest and will be addressed later.)
 
Since this seems so basic, Keynes is puzzled at how its been so ignored:
 
The completeness of the [classical] victory is something of a curiosity and a mystery. It must have been due to a complex of suitabilities in the doctrine to the environment into which it was projected. That it reached conclusions quite different from what the ordinary uninstructed person would expect, added, I suppose, to its intellectual prestige. That its teaching, translated into practice, was austere and often unpalatable, lent it virtue. That it was adapted to carry a vast and consistent logical superstructure, gave it beauty. That it could explain much social injustice and apparent cruelty as an inevitable incident in the scheme of progress, and the attempt to change such things as likely on the whole to do more harm than good, commended it to authority. That it afforded a measure of justification to the free activities of the individual capitalist, attracted to it the support of the dominant social force behind authority.
 
But although the doctrine itself has remained unquestioned by orthodox economists up to a late date, its signal failure for purposes of scientific prediction has greatly impaired, in the course of time, the prestige of its practitioners. For professional economists, after Malthus, were apparently unmoved by the lack of correspondence between the results of their theory and the facts of observation;a discrepancy which the ordinary man has not failed to observe, with the result of his growing unwillingness to accord to economists that measure of respect which he gives to other groups of scientists whose theoretical results are confirmed by observation when they are applied to the facts.
 
The celebrated optimism of traditional economic theory, which has led to economists being looked upon as Candides, who, having left this world for the cultivation of their gardens, teach that all is for the best in the best of all possible worlds provided we will let well alone, is also to be traced, I think, to their having neglected to take account of the drag on prosperity which can be exercised by an insufficiency of effective demand. For there would obviously be a natural tendency towards the optimum employment of resources in a society which was functioning after the manner of the classical postulates. It may well be that the classical theory represents the way in which we should like our economy to behave. But to assume that it actually does so is to assume our difficulties away.
 
4: The next three chapters arent so much part of the argument as attempts to clear up some basic concepts and objections.
 
We start by observing its impossible to measure things like net output or price level accurately  youre always trying to compare qualitatively different things and run into no end of difficulties.
 
To say that net output to-day is greater, but the price-level lower, than ten years ago or one year ago, is a proposition of a similar character to the statement that Queen Victoria was a better queen but not a happier woman than Queen Elizabeth  a proposition not without meaning and not without interest, but unsuitable as material for the differential calculus. Our precision will be a mock precision if we try to use such partly vague and non-quantitative concepts as the basis of a quantitative analysis.
 
We cant measure net output, but we can count the number of people employed. In general, if more people are working then more stuff is getting made, although this obviously isnt a perfect connection. But employment is kind of a more interesting number and it will have to do.
 
So well use only two types of counts: those of actual currency (money-values) and those of people (employment). And while workers are obviously not all equivalent the way dollar bills are, we can take an hour of unskilled labor as our standard and count people with special skills as multiples of an hour of unskilled labor. Thus if someone makes twice as much per hour as an unskilled laborer, well count each hour they work as two unskilled hours. Well call these hours labor-units and well call the money that gets paid for them wage-units. Thus the total amount spent on wages equals the wage-unit times the number of labor-units.
 
[AS: Obviously this accounting fiction isnt particularly realistic since, in reality, the multiples people get paid change as the wage-unit goes up. Lets say Im a lawyer who makes $300 an hour and minimum wage is $5 an hour. If the minimum wage is doubled to $10 an hour, Im not suddenly going to get paid $600 an hour, even though my relative productivity hasnt changed. Keynes seems to suggest this can be modeled as a rapid liability to change in the supply of labor; I guess thats possible.]
 
And as for some people being better at some jobs than others, we just pretend thats an artifact of the equipment they use. In other words, as employment goes up and we run out of skilled truck-builders, we say the truck factory is getting less efficient. (If, indeed, theres nobody left who can build the trucks, we say the truck factorys efficiency has gone to zero.)
 
As problematic as this is, Keynes points out that its a lot more realistic than the classical theory, which just seems to magically assume everyone is paid in proportion to their productivity. By subsuming more efficient people with their machinery, Keynes says he better deals with the usual case, which is that the increase in efficiency goes to their boss (who owns the machines). And when more efficient workers actually are paid more, he takes that into account as noted above.
 
5: Businesses make production decisions not based on sales or anything solidly measurable, but on personal opinions: expectations. These can be either short-term expectations (the barrista will be given the day off if management doesnt expect any customers) or long-term expectations (Starbucks wont open up a new story if they expect coffee consumption to start going down).
 
Either way, new expectations dont always take effect immediately (if you just opened a new store and then decide it wasnt worth it, you dont immediately close it). And the process of adjusting can have some odd effects: if you need to quickly ramp up production, you might keep hiring until you have more employees than you really need in the long-run. You use the extra people to get you up to speed, then you lay them off. The result is a gradual crescendo in the level of employment, rising to a peak and then declining to the new long-period level. This can happen even if you dont expect to sell more things, but just a slightly different thing: you overhire to get up to speed on the new model, but then fire people until youre back down to your previous level.
 
An uninterrupted process of transition, such as the above, to a new long-period position can be complicated in detail. But the actual course of events is more complicated still. For the state of expectation is liable to constant change, a new expectation being superimposed long before the previous change has fully worked itself out; so that the economic machine is occupied at any given time with a number of overlapping activities, the existence of which is due to various past states of expectation.
 
That said, todays decisions are based on the conditions of today and expectations about tomorrow  not on past expectations or the conditions of the past. And, in practice, people dont calculate their expectations from scratch each morning. They keep doing what they did yesterday unless they have a reason to change. Long-term expectations cant be easily checked, so when they do change, they often change suddenly. Thus they cant even be approximately estimated.
 
6: When youre producing something, there are a couple of things involved. One is the amount of capital and equipment and so on you use up, which well call the user cost. Another is the amount you pay to employees and other companies and so on, the factor cost. These two combined are the prime cost. The entrepreneurs income is the value of his output less the prime cost  thats what he tries to maximize.
 
Entrepreneurs can also lose capital due to unavoidable events  a market crash, an earthquake, the passage of time. These are supplementary costs. In addition, there are the unavoidable and unforeseen, which well call windfall loss. Well define net income as just income minus supplementary costs, since people cant really be blamed for the unforeseen events.
 
The total income of the community is just the amount sold minus the user cost. And total consumption is just all the stuff that isnt sold to other businesses. [AS: Ive been saying businesses because I find it clearer, but Keynes actually says entrepreneurs. I think I also use this kind of interchangeably with capitalists. Sorry.] Saving, of course, is just income minus consumption.
 
Investment is just the amount of current output that isnt consumed. But since saving is just the amount of income that isnt consumed and income is just output (output is always output to someone), savings necessarily equals investment.
 
[AS: This seems to be a little controversial (and, indeed, tends to be a bit confusing), but lets just accept it as a quirky definition, not any kind of factual claim.]
 
7: Keynes spends the chapter defending his decision to define savings as equal to investment. [AS: I think he only ends up in making things more confusing, but maybe Im missing something.]
 
8: We return now to our main argument. Earlier we said people spend the  money they get, but not all of it. What changes how much they spend? Not much, Keynes argues. (Maybe large changes in interest rates, but those are rare.)
 
The fundamental psychological law, he says, is that, on average, the amount people spend increases as the amount they make increases, but not as quickly. (If you make $50K a year, you might spend $40K of it. If you make $1M, you might spend $500K of it. Obviously a lot more in absolute terms, but far less proportionately.) And this is especially true in the short-term  peoples habits take time to catch up with their incomes.
 
But this means that as national income increases, a smaller proportion of it will get spent, so more of it will have to be invested. And when national income falls, a larger proportion gets spent as people dip into savings and governments go into deficit. This is fortunate, because lower consumption also means lower income (when people buy less, businesses make less, so they pay you less). If consumption fell at the same rate as income, wed fall into a downward spiral: lower consumption would mean lower income, which in turn would mean lower consumption, and soon wed all be out of a job.
 
Consumption  to repeat the obvious  is the sole end and object of all economic activity. What are we making things for if not to use them? People can either be put to work making things for people to use today or making things for people to use tomorrow, but that tomorrow cannot be pushed indefinitely into the future. After all, an hour of labor cannot be saved and put into a bank for a rainy day! If people are out of work now, the time theyre wasting will never be recovered. [AS: This is truly brilliant. Its hard to convey the excitement I felt when reading this.] Saving money for the future is not the same as making things for the future  its only the latter thats useful.
 
But its not easy to think of useful things to make for the future. Eventually, were forced to make things for today. But as our incomes increase, we spend less on things today. And theres our trap: if we dont make things for tomorrow and we dont make things for today, people are forced out of work since theres nothing for them to make.
 
Another way to look at it is the more stuff we make for tomorrow, the less stuff we need to make tomorrow. And then what do we do? At some point we just need to consume more stuff.
 
People seem to recognize this when it comes to government making stuff. What will you do, it is asked, when you have built all the houses and roads and town halls and electric grids and water supplies and so forth which the stationary population of the future can be expected to require? But the same logic applies to private investment. What will we do when weve built all the factories the people of the future can be expected to use?
 
Money cant survive on its own. If we dont ever spend it, it becomes worthless.
 
9: How does raising interest rates affect consumption? Weve said it doesnt have much effect on peoples propensity to consume, but a higher interest rate means its more expensive to borrow money, which means companies invest less, which means incomes are reduced. (Since savings=investment, incomes are reduced such that the amount left over for savings equals the lesser amount now invested. [AS: This is the first use of that suspicious definition.]) Most people think that as the interest rate goes up, spending goes down and saving goes up, but this shows that saving and spending both decrease.
 
The more virtuous we are, the more determinedly thrifty, the more obstinately orthodox in our national and personal finance, the more our incomes will have to fall when interest rises relatively to the marginal efficiency of capital. Obstinacy can bring only a penalty and no reward. For the result is inevitable.
 
Thus, after all, the actual rates of aggregate saving and spending do not depend on Precaution, Foresight, Calculation, Improvement, Independence, Enterprise, Pride or Avarice. Virtue and vice play no part. It all depends on how far the rate of interest is favourable to investment, after taking account of the marginal efficiency of capital. No, this is an overstatement. If the rate of interest were so governed as to maintain continuous full employment, Virtue would resume her sway;  the rate of capital accumulation would depend on the weakness of the propensity to consume. Thus, once again, the tribute that classical economists pay to her is due to their concealed assumption that the rate of interest always is so governed.
 
10: Weve established that an increase in investment leads to an increase in income. But how much? Even if you hire people for investment, the money those people get paid in turn gets spent on additional consumption, increasing employment indirectly as well. (Of course, this is only true until we hit full employment  then prices just inflate.)
 
There must be an investment multiplier  call it k  such that an extra $1 invested leads to $k increase in income. And there must be a similar employment multiplier (k) where for each person hired for a job, k people get hired in total.
 
But spending can have negative effects as well. [AS: Keynes apparently has government investment  i.e. stimulus  in mind here, although he never really comes out and says it.] If the interest rate goes up, that will slow investment. If people lose confidence because of all the spending, they may decide to hold onto their money. And some of the money can leak out to other countries. But this just weakens the multiplier, it doesnt eliminate it.
 
Recall that the classical theory said people needed to be paid enough to compensate them for their distaste for working. But if youve been unemployed long enough, you might actually want to work. If thats true, even wasting money is a good thing. Pyramid-building, earthquakes, even wars may serve to increase wealth, if the education of our statesmen on the principles of the classical economics stands in the way of anything better.
 
It is curious how common sense, wriggling for an escape from absurd conclusions, has been apt to reach a preference for wholly wasteful forms of loan expenditure rather than for partly wasteful forms, which, because they are not wholly wasteful, tend to be judged on strict business principles. For example, unemployment relief financed by loans is more readily accepted than the financing of improvements at a charge below the current rate of interest; whilst the form of digging holes in the ground known as gold-mining, which not only adds nothing whatever to the real wealth of the world but involves the disutility of labour, is the most acceptable of all solutions.
 
(Recall that at this time the world was still on the gold standard and thus mining for gold was equivalent to printing new money.)
 
If the Treasury were to fill old bottles with banknotes, bury them at suitable depths in disused coalmines which are then filled up to the surface with town rubbish, and leave it to private enterprise on well-tried principles of laissez-faire to dig the notes up again (the right to do so being obtained, of course, by tendering for leases of the note-bearing territory), there need be no more unemployment and, with the help of the repercussions, the real income of the community, and its capital wealth also, would probably become a good deal greater than it actually is. It would, indeed, be more sensible to build houses and the like; but if there are political and practical difficulties in the way of this, the above would be better than nothing.
 
The analogy between this expedient and the goldmines of the real world is complete. At periods when gold is available at suitable depths experience shows that the real wealth of the world increases rapidly; and when but little of it is so available, our wealth suffers stagnation or decline. Thus gold-mines are of the greatest value and importance to civilisation. just as wars have been the only form of large-scale loan expenditure which statesmen have thought justifiable, so gold-mining is the only pretext for digging holes in the ground which has recommended itself to bankers as sound finance; and each of these activities has played its part in progress-failing something better. To mention a detail, the tendency in slumps for the price of gold to rise in terms of labour and materials aids eventual recovery, because it increases the depth at which gold-digging pays and lowers the minimum grade of ore which is payable.
 
(Keynes goes on to contrast gold-mining with building new houses which, being actually useful, has the side effect of decreasing the rent of old ones.)
 
Ancient Egypt was doubly fortunate, and doubtless owed to this its fabled wealth, in that it possessed two activities, namely, pyramid-building as well as the search for the precious metals, the fruits of which, since they could not serve the needs of man by being consumed, did not stale with abundance. The Middle Ages built cathedrals and sang dirges. Two pyramids, two masses for the dead, are twice as good as one; but not so two railways from London to York. Thus we are so sensible, have schooled ourselves to so close a semblance of prudent financiers, taking careful thought before we add to the financial burdens of posterity by building them houses to live in, that we have no such easy escape from the sufferings of unemployment. We have to accept them as an inevitable result of applying to the conduct of the State the maxims which are best calculated to enrich an individual by enabling him to pile up claims to enjoyment which he does not intend to exercise at any definite time. [emphasis added]
 
11: Imagine you get a new widget-making machine. Theres the value of the widgets you expect [AS: theres that word again] it to produce, less the cost of its inputs and maintenance. Call that the yield. Then theres the cost of creating one more new widget-making machine. Call that the supply cost. The marginal efficiency of capital is the yield less the supply cost. [AS: Marginal efficiency of capital comes up a lot, so well save time by calling it your expected return.]
 
Of course theres lots of different things you can invest in; were assuming that you do whatever maximizes your expected return. And obviously youll keep borrowing money and investing it until your expected return reaches the market rate of interest.
 
Its through the expected yield that changes in the value of money affect output. If people expect inflation, then expected yields go up and people invest more. Deflation does the opposite.
 
(Tyler Cowen, in his critical comments on the General Theory is struck by a throw-off clause in this chapter: Keynes says that its unlikely interest rates will go up if people expect inflation, since if people expected inflation prices would have gone up already. He writes:This simple yet powerful point doesnt get the attention it ought to. Storage costs for goods and services may eliminate this paradox but perhaps not completely. It is striking how few economists have thought this problem through.)
 
12: As we noted before, capitalists invest if they expect future sales to be high. But how do they know what future sales will be? If we speak frankly, we have to admit that our basis of knowledge for estimating the yield ten years hence of a railway, a copper mine, a textile factory, the goodwill of a patent medicine, an Atlantic liner, a building in the City of London amounts to little and sometimes to nothing; or even five years hence.
 
In olden days, what happened was that rough-riding men of business thought taking risks was manly and invested their money as a way of life. They got it in their head that they were going to build a railroad, and by Jove they did. They didnt sit down and calculate whether they could have made more money buying bonds instead. Bonds are for wusses.
 
But now people invest their money in the stock market, which revises its profitability estimates minute-by-minute. It is as though a farmer, having tapped his barometer after breakfast, could decide to remove his capital from the farming business between 10 and 11 in the morning and reconsider whether he should return to it later in the week. And since much new investment money is raised on the stock market, its these estimates which influence new investment.
 
And the stock market depends on what is, in truth, a convention  namely that the current valuation of a company is an accurate assessment of its expected yield  that stock prices will only change if theres new evidence suggesting the yield will be different. Thus, even though we actually have no clue what the yield might be, we all agree that the current stock price is our best guess and instead of worrying about the fact we actually have no clue what the right stock price is whatsoever, we only have to worry about those things which will affect it (the stock price).
 
So stock traders dont sit down and try to calculate the long-term expected yield; they try to guess the short-term change in the stock price and trade base on that.
 
This is the inevitable result of investment markets organised with a view to so-called liquidity. Of the maxims of orthodox finance none, surely, is more anti-social than the fetish of liquidity, the doctrine that it is a positive virtue on the part of investment institutions to concentrate their resources upon the holding of liquid securities. It forgets that there is no such thing as liquidity of investment for the community as a whole. The social object of skilled investment should be to defeat the dark forces of time and ignorance which envelop our future. The actual, private object of the most skilled investment to-day is to beat the gun, as the Americans so well express it, to outwit the crowd, and to pass the bad, or depreciating, half-crown to the other fellow.
 
This battle of wits to anticipate the basis of conventional valuation a few months hence, rather than the prospective yield of an investment over a long term of years, does not even require gulls amongst the public to feed the maws of the professional;  it can be played by professionals amongst themselves. Nor is it necessary that anyone should keep his simple faith in the conventional basis of valuation having any genuine long-term validity. For it is, so to speak, a game of Snap, of Old Maid, of Musical Chairs  a pastime in which he is victor who says Snap neither too soon nor too late, who passes the Old Maid to his neighbour before the game is over, who secures a chair for himself when the music stops. These games can be played with zest and enjoyment, though all the players know that it is the Old Maid which is circulating, or that when the music stops some of the players will find themselves unseated.
 
Or, to change the metaphor slightly, professional investment may be likened to those newspaper competitions in which the competitors have to pick out the six prettiest faces from a hundred photographs, the prize being awarded to the competitor whose choice most nearly corresponds to the average preferences of the competitors as a whole; so that each competitor has to pick, not those faces which he himself finds prettiest, but those which he thinks likeliest to catch the fancy of the other competitors, all of whom are looking at the problem from the same point of view. It is not a case of choosing those which, to the best of ones judgment, are really the prettiest, nor even those which average opinion genuinely thinks the prettiest. We have reached the third degree where we devote our intelligences to anticipating what average opinion expects the average opinion to be. And there are some, I believe, who practise the fourth, fifth and higher degrees.
 
You might think that this just means someone who actually does sit down and calculate expected yields could make vast profits from all the speculators playing Snap. But calculating expected yields is much harder than guessing what everyone else will do; theres no reason to think spending the same amount of time doing that is any more profitable.
 
And getting money for it is much harder  people dont like it when you tell them Yes, the stocks you bought are worthless now but just wait! Nothing real has changed, you just need to hold on and see if Im right in the long run. People dont like it when their stocks go down. Theyd much rather invest their money so that its valuation keeps going up and up and up.
 
And even if they were willing to wait, why should they trust you? For it is in the essence of his behaviour that he should be eccentric, unconventional and rash in the eyes of average opinion. If he is successful, that will only confirm the general belief in his rashness; and if in the short run he is unsuccessful, which is very likely, he will not receive much mercy. Worldly wisdom teaches that it is better for reputation to fail conventionally than to succeed unconventionally.
 
The more open our stock markets get, the more speculators predominate, and the worse things get for us.
 
When the capital development of a country becomes a by-product of the activities of a casino, the job is likely to be ill-done. The measure of success attained by Wall Street, regarded as an institution of which the proper social purpose is to direct new investment into the most profitable channels in terms of future yield, cannot be claimed as one of the outstanding triumphs of laissez-faire capitalism  which is not surprising, if I am right in thinking that the best brains of Wall Street have been in fact directed towards a different object.
 
A hefty tax on each trade might be the best way to discourage speculation and thus improve the functioning of the market. You might think (as Keynes once did) that the best solution is to just force people to hold on to what they buy, so they have to figure out what its really worth beforehand, but this will just push people to hold on to their money. The only solution would be to force everyone to either to buy goods or capital assets with everything they own.
 
And we return to the problem that many of our economic decisions depend on our spontaneous optimism, our animal spirits, our urge to action rather than inaction, not the outcome of a weighted average of quantitative benefits multiplied by quantitative probabilities. This means not only that slumps get exaggerated (since they depress animal spirits, worsening the slump) but that economic performance depends to a large degree on keeping businessmen happy. If electing FDR gets them depressed, they might pull back their investments and send the economy into a slump. This isnt a conspiracy, its just the natural outcome of a system that depends on rich people feeling good. In estimating the prospects of investment, we must have regard, therefore, to the nerves and hysteria and even the digestions and reactions to the weather of those upon whose spontaneous activity it largely depends.
 
As a result, it seems likely that the State, which can calculate these things with an eye to the long-term and the social good, will take over more and more of the job of organizing long-term investment.
 
[Tyler Cowen: This is the best chapter in the book and one of the most important economics essays of all time.  The insights here have yet to be fully mined.]
 
13: We said before that businesses keep investing until their expected return reaches the interest rate (so lower interest rates mean more investment), but what determines the interest rate?
 
Its often said that the interest rate is the price people demand for saving money instead of spending it. But this clearly isnt true  people can save money under their mattress and not get any interest. No, the interest rate is the price people demand for parting with their cash.
 
 which implies that if the rate of interest were lower, i.e. if the reward for parting with cash were diminished, the aggregate amount of cash which the public would wish to hold would exceed the available supply, and that if the rate of interest were raised, there would be a surplus of cash which no one would be willing to hold. And if thats true then the quantity of money is the other factor that determines interest rates. Thus the interest rate depends on peoples desire to hoard cash  their liquidity preference (L)  and the quantity of money (M).
 
Why is there a liquidity preference? Why dont people just invest all their money? Interest rates never go below zero, after all. A full explanation is complex and must wait for Chapter 15. But we can see one reason now: uncertainty about the expected [AS: theres that word again] rate of interest. If we expect interest rates to go up, we might want to hold on to our cash and use it to buy higher-yield bonds later. And thus, just as capital investment was driven by stock market speculation, interest rates are driven by bond market speculation. Again we have a tradeoff between having a market (and thus volatility) or no market (and thus overcaution).
 
There are other reasons people might want to hold cash. If they expect to do a cash transaction in the future, theyll need to sell a bond then  but if the interest rate has risen in the meantime, theyll be selling the bond at a loss. And if the interest rate falls, the economy will grow and people will need more cash for these sorts of transactions.
 
OK, so we have the following model: more money reduces the interest rate (as long as liquidity preference doesnt go up faster), lower interest rates increase investment (as long as expected return doesnt fall faster), more investment leads to more employment (as long as the propensity to consume doesnt fall faster), and if employment increases prices will rise which can increase liquidity preference and thus require more money.
 
The public cant control the amount of hoarding, since thats necessarily equal to the amount of cash. All it can do is change the price of hoarding  the interest rate.
 
14: Certainly the ordinary man  banker, civil servant or politician  brought up on the traditional theory, and the trained economist also, has carried away with him the idea that whenever an individual performs an act of saving he has done something which automatically brings down the rate of interest  without the necessity for any special intervention or grandmotherly care on the part of the monetary authority.
 
But weve seen theyre quite wrong. Saving doesnt lower the interest rate and thus increase investment  an increase in money does that. Instead, saving lowers demand and thus decreases employment. In which case, a decreased readiness to spend will be looked on in quite a different light.
 
[AS: And so this is the famous paradox of thrift. While each person thinks theyll do better off by saving money instead of spending it, if a whole country decides to save their money, theyre all worse off, since nobody will have a job.]
 
[AS: Im taking a bit from chapter 16 since it seems to really belong here:]
 
An act of individual saving means  so to speak  a decision not to have dinner to-day. But it is not a promise to have dinner tomorrow  it doesnt replace current demand with future demand; it decreases demand altogether. And since future demand is estimated based on present demand, it tends to decrease investment as well. Thus decreased consumption leads to decreased employment.
 
Its difficult to get people to realize that investing money doesnt actually lead to an increase in investments. The problem is that capitalists arent buying capital per se, theyre buying an expected yield. They dont care how good the machine is at making widgets, what matters is whether they can make money selling the widgets. If interest rates go up, it no longer becomes possible for them to make money, even though the machine remains unchanged.
 
15: The central bank can lower the short-term interest rate through open-market operations: printing money and using it to buy short-term government debt. But this doesnt effect the long-term rates, which depend on peoples expectations of what the government will do to short-term rates. Perhaps the government should start buying and selling long-term bonds to address this.
 
Its also possible (although unlikely) that no one will believe the government can keep rates so low and so they begin hoarding all the new cash the government prints. In this event the monetary authority would have lost effective control over the rate of interest. [AS: This, I presume, is the liquidity trap.] But whilst this limiting case might become practically important in future, I know of no example of it hitherto.  Moreover, if such a situation were to arise, it would mean that the public authority itself could borrow through the banking system on an unlimited scale at a nominal rate of interest. [AS: The US, however, is in this situation right now (2009).]
 
Other traps are hyperinflation (where no one wants to hold onto money) and a financial crisis (where no one trusts the banks enough to let go of money). And theres the issue that even at low rates of interest, banks still need to trust their borrowers and make enough to pay their expenses, which may require them to raise rates.
 
16: OK, so were in a liquidity trap. There are all sorts of practical problems with lowering interest below zero, so instead what happens is that, in laissez-faire, employment falls to reach the new low levels. The only thing that can save us is if millionaires find their satisfaction in building mighty mansions to contain their bodies when alive and pyramids to shelter them after death, or, repenting of their sins, erect cathedrals and endow monasteries or foreign missions. Thats no way to run a country.
 
So the government will print money to keep the interest rate at a level corresponding to full employment. Presumably this means that interest rates will become very low (although you dont want them so low that nobodys making things to sell today). But as interest rates get lower, it becomes profitable to invest in building things with smaller and smaller expected yields.
 
If this happens, then it seems likely that within a generation expected return will reach zero [AS: !!] and everything will reach its marginal cost.
 
This gets rid of the most objectionable features of capitalism  people could still become rich by saving money, but there would be nothing left to invest it in, so their money wouldnt ever grow. It would be the end of the rentier  the rich person who grows richer by using his wealth to  exploiting others.
 
17: Lets step back for a second. Why is money so special? After all, a bond is just a promise to get some money in the future. Why should it be any different from a futures contract on wheat? We could imagine paying the future wheat contracts in terms of wheat, resulting in a wheat interest rate. [AS: This sounds pretty ridiculous, I know, but give it a minute.]
 
The big problem is that money is the one thing market processes cant adjust. 1) You cant just go ahead and make it  it cant be grown like a crop or manufactured like a motor-car. 2) You cant reclaim it from use for other purposes  it doesnt have any. (Land cant be grown either, but if we really needed to we could free some up by moving closer together. 3) Its very easy to store  it doesnt spoil. Which is why the suggestion of  making it spoil (by printing money with expiration dates, etc.) are on the right track.
 
Otherwise, our only relief comes from printing more money.
 
Thus in the absence of money and in the absence  we must, of course, also suppose  of any other commodity with the assumed characteristics of money, the rates of interest would only reach equilibrium when there is full employment. Unemployment develops, that is to say, because people want the moon;  men cannot be employed when the object of desire (i.e. money) is something which cannot be produced and the demand for which cannot be readily choked off. There is no remedy but to persuade the public that green cheese is practically the same thing and to have a green cheese factory (i.e. a central bank) under public control.
 
It is interesting to notice that the characteristic which has been traditionally supposed to render gold especially suitable for use as the standard of value, namely, its inelasticity of supply, turns out to be precisely the characteristic which is at the bottom of the trouble.
 
The classical view is that we are kept poor by our impatience  we insist on spending money now instead of saving it for later, when it will grow into more. But the truth is exactly the opposite: That the world after several millennia of steady individual saving, is so poor as it is in accumulated capital-assets, is to be explained, in my opinion, neither by the improvident propensities of mankind, nor even by the destruction of war, but by the high liquidity-premiums formerly attaching to the ownership of land and now attaching to money.
 
18: Keynes restates the theory.
 
19: Now that we have the theory, we can return to the point we started with: reducing nominal wages is unhelpful. The only thing that could work is a one-time decrease in everyones wages to a new level, but that a) is never going to happen in a democracy and b) unfairly penalizes wage-earners over everyone else. There are advantages in some degree of flexibility in the wages of particular industries so as to expedite transfers from those which are relatively declining to those which are relatively expanding. But the money-wage level as a whole should be maintained as stable as possible, at any rate in the short period.
 
20: Weve said that employment ultimately comes from demand. So why should the government promote investment instead of demand? Its because investment comes first. If you give people money to buy more (say) iPods, then first all the existing iPods get sold. This raises the price, which makes Apple richer but doesnt help any employees  and Apple likes to save its money much more than its employees do. Eventually they begin to run out of iPods and start investing in additional factories to make more. And then those factories hire people to work there, who spend their wages on other things. It works, its just slow  if you want to get people employed quickly, youre better off starting with building the factories.
 
OK, so you promote investment, but how much investment? Well, until you have full employment obviously.
 
21: Traditional economics is divided between the theory of value (perfect competition, supply and demand, and all that good stuff) in the main spot and then over to the side has a separate theory of money (dealing interest rates and inflation), with no clear connection between the two. We have all of us become used to finding ourselves sometimes on the one side of the moon and sometimes on the other, without knowing what route or journey connects them, related, apparently, after the fashion of our waking and our dreaming lives. The right split is between the theory of the individual industry and the theory of the economy as a whole. Or perhaps between the stationary economy and the shifting one, for moneys power flows from its being a link between the present and the future.
 
So how does printing money affect prices? Well, the naive view is that it doesnt  the additional money gets used to buy more things which hires more people  until everyone is hired. Then the money cant go to hire more people so it just goes to bid up the prices of things, creating inflation. As I said, thats the naive view  there are a couple complications.
 
How does money influence demand? Primarily thru the rate of interest, which depends on liquidity preferences, marginal efficiencies, and investment multipliers. But these all depend on other complicating factors.
 
Marginal prime costs and labor costs increase as industry is forced to use more expensive equipment and laborers, resulting in higher prices. Some industries hit bottlenecks first, causing their prices to rise and demand to be funneled into industries that are faster to respond. Then as some workers receive better wages other workers will demand it and, since business is booming, receive it. Finally, with the additional demand equipment and so on will have to be replaced, raising marginal costs.
 
Theres an asymmetry in the system that workers will resist falling wages, but not rising ones. But this is good, because otherwise wages would fall to zero in any downturn and the entire economy would shut down. But the side effect is that the very long-run course of prices has almost always been upward.
 
22: Why are there trade cycles, aka business cycles, aka booms and busts?
 
Lets start by thinking about the end of the boom. So business is booming and everyones optimistic  even though costs of production (and maybe interest rates) are rising, sales are too, so expected profits are looking good. But since no one really knows what theyre doing, especially not the speculators, its understandable that when disillusion falls upon an over-optimistic and over-bought market, it should fall with sudden and even catastrophic force. Everyone gets freaked out that theyre not going to make money anymore and stops investing and raises their liquidity preference, raising interest rates and lowering investment further.
 
Because these things go together, theyre sometimes mistaken as the cause, but note that its the expected return which falls first, then interest rates rise. So even lowering interest rates isnt enough to recover from the crash. And it is not so easy to revive the marginal efficiency of capital, determined, as it is, by the uncontrollable and disobedient psychology of the business world. It is the return of confidence, to speak in ordinary language, which is so insusceptible to control in an economy of individualistic capitalism. This is the aspect of the slump which bankers and business men have been right in emphasising, and which the economists who have put their faith in a purely monetary remedy have underestimated.
 
And there are other problems: when the stock market crashes, rich people see themselves as less rich and decide to start spending less. (And when everyone follows the stock market, like in the US, this applies to everyone.) And the fact that people arent spending further decreases expected returns.
 
So thats the bust. What about recovery? Well, recovery cant come until old equipment is used up and has to be replaced and old stocks of goods that were produced get sold off and have to be replenished. When recovery picks up, it feeds on itself in the opposite way. But you cant jump-start it just by lowering interest rates, since the real problem is expected return. Thus the government must step in.
 
Reading this, you might think the solution is to raise interest rates to prevent overinvestment during booms, since lowering them doesnt get you out of slumps. But theres two kinds of overinvestment: disappointing investments, where the investment would have made sense except the economy collapsed, and genuine overinvestment, where the investment could never have made money. Its only the second kind thats an actual waste of resources, and the solution to it isnt raising interest rates which would probably deter some useful investments and might further diminish the propensity to consume, but in taking drastic steps, by redistributing incomes or otherwise, to stimulate the propensity to consume.
 
Why does redistributing income work? Think about the dot-com bubble where everyone was blowing money on useless fiber-optic cable. If venture capitalists are spending all their money on useless cable, the solution is to take their money away. Instead, you can give it to poor people, who will use it to buy useful things like food and clothing.
 
What happens isnt so much excessive investment as misdirected investment. Everyone builds houses thinking theyll all sell for lots and lots, then they find they arent actually selling for so much and the economy collapses. We reach a condition where there is a shortage of houses, but where nevertheless no one can afford to live in the houses that there are.
 
Thus the remedy for the boom is not a higher rate of interest but a lower rate of interest! For that may enable the so-called boom to last. The right remedy for the trade cycle is not to be found in abolishing booms and thus keeping us permanently in a semi-slump; but in abolishing slumps and thus keeping us permanently in a quasi-boom. []
 
Except during the war, I doubt if we have any recent experience of a boom so strong that it led to full employment.  Nor was there over-investment in the sense that the standard and equipment of housing was so high that everyone, assuming full employment, had all he wanted at a rate which would no more than cover the replacement cost, without any allowance for interest, over the life of the house; and that transport, public services and agricultural improvement had been carried to a point where further additions could not reasonably be expected to yield even their replacement cost. Quite the contrary. It would be absurd to assert of the United States in 1929 the existence of over-investment in the strict sense.
 
In short, increasing interest rates to kill booms belongs to the species of remedy which cures the disease by killing the patient.
 
What would the world of the permanent boom look like? Its conceivable that it might lead not just to full employment, but full investment  a world with so much plenty that you couldnt expect to make a profit on any kind of durable good. Moreover, this situation might be reached comparatively soonsay within twenty-five years or less. I must not be taken to deny this, because I assert that a state of full investment in the strict sense has never yet occurred, not even momentarily.
 
Others say the problem is that the country is so unequal that poor people cant spend enough. The solution, they propose, is redistributing money to the poor to promote jobs. They are undoubtedly in the right [at present], when investment is unplanned and uncontrolled. Theres no other way to raise employment. If you cant increase investment, you have to increase consumption.
 
But we could increase investment: the wisest course is to advance on both fronts at once. Not just so that the people we give money to can buy the new products investment creates, but so that they have enough money to buy even more, and thus spark growth themselves!
 
23: Now that Keynes has outlined his revolutionary theory, its time to look back at other economists the classical school dismissed.
 
The classical school  including Keynes in earlier years  grew up mocking mercantilism (protectionism) as incoherent and absurd. But maybe it makes some sense: Growth depends on the inducements to new investment. Investment is either foreign or domestic. Domestic investment is encouraged by the interest rate and foreign investment by the balance of trade. Thus, if you ignore direct investment by the government (as people had), these are the two things to be concerned about.
 
Now in general the interest rate is governed by the quantity of money and in an age in which substantial foreign loans and the outright ownership of wealth located abroad are scarcely practicable (not to mention the international gold standard), money equals precious metals which equals the balance of trade. (Since running a trade deficit with a country means sending them your precious metals instead of your exports.) Thus focusing on the balance of trade serves both purposes  and, at a time we didnt know how to control interest rates, was the only direct means of controlling them.
 
Not all protectionism promotes the balance of trade, of course  mid-1800s Britain probably would have done best with complete free trade. But mercantilists saw the key points sooner than most, calling for an increase in money to reduce the interest rate.
 
But the worst part of the international gold system is the way it sets countries against one another. For a country could only keep its citizens employed if it had gold, and the only way to get gold was by taking it from another country (and thus throwing them out of work). Never in history was there a method devised of such efficacy for setting each countrys advantage at variance with its neighbours!
 
The mercantilists perceived the existence of the problem without being able to push their analysis to the point of solving it. But the classical school ignored the problem, as a consequence of introducing into their premisses conditions which involved its non-existence; with the result of creating a cleavage between the conclusions of economic theory and those of common sense. The extraordinary achievement of the classical theory was to overcome the beliefs of the natural man and, at the same time, to be wrong.
 
Another thing the classical economists long mocked were laws against usury.  I was brought up to believe that the attitude of the Medieval Church to the rate of interest was inherently absurd, and that the subtle discussions aimed at distinguishing the return on money-loans from the return to active investment were merely Jesuitical attempts to find a practical escape from a foolish theory. But I now read these discussions as an honest intellectual effort to keep separate what the classical theory has inextricably confused together, namely, the rate of interest and the marginal efficiency of capital. For it now seems clear that the disquisitions of the schoolmen were directed towards the elucidation of a formula which should allow the schedule of the marginal efficiency of capital to be high, whilst using rule and custom and the moral law to keep down the rate of interest. After all, individual savings may be absorbed either by investment or by debts, and that there is no security that they will find an outlet in the former. Laws against usury help ensure they do.
 
It is convenient to mention at this point the strange, unduly neglected prophet Silvio Gesell (1862-1930), whose work contains flashes of deep insight and who only just failed to reach down to the essence of the matter. In the post-war years his devotees bombarded me with copies of his works; yet, owing to certain palpable defects in the argument, I entirely failed to discover their merit. As is often the case with imperfectly analysed intuitions, their significance only became apparent after I had reached my own conclusions in my own way. Meanwhile, like other academic economists, I treated his profoundly original strivings as being no better than those of a crank. Since few of the readers of this book are likely to be well acquainted with the significance of Gesell, I will give to him what would be otherwise a disproportionate space.
 
Among Gesells proposals are the notion of stamped money (money you have to pay to get stamped regularly to keep it valid currency) which is a way of discouraging people from hoarding. The idea behind stamped money is sound.  But there are many difficulties which Gesell did not face. In particular, he was unaware that money was not unique  if people didnt hoard it, theres lots of other things they could hoard.
 
Keynes also discusses Bernard Mandevilles incredible book, The Fable of the Bees. This incredible work of economic thought described the division of labor and the invisible hand in 1705, a full seventy years before Adam Smith. And, Keynes points out, its largely about the paradox of thrift  centuries before Keynes! Its basically been written out of economic history, in part, no doubt, because it was written in the form of a scandalous satirical epic poem. Indeed, it so scandalized its readers at the time that it was convicted as a nuisance by the grand jury of Middlesex in 1723, which stands out in the history of the moral sciences for its scandalous reputation.
 
Finally we come to Major Douglas, who led the unorthodox Social Credit movement in the UK:
 
Major Douglas is entitled to claim, as against some of his orthodox adversaries, that he at least has not been wholly oblivious of the outstanding problem of our economic system. Yet he has scarcely established an equal claim to rank  a private, perhaps, but not a major in the brave army of heretics  with Mandeville, Malthus, Gesell and Hobson, who, following their intuitions, have preferred to see the truth obscurely and imperfectly rather than to maintain error, reached indeed with clearness and consistency and by easy logic, but on hypotheses inappropriate to the facts.
 
24: The two great economic problems are unemployment and inequality. We have addressed the first, but what are its implications of the second? Inequality has been addressed somewhat by government redistribution, but some are hesitant to go further because they believe that growth is promoted by savings and so taking away the savings of the rich will retard growth. We have seen that its quite the opposite  that redistribution, by increasing effective demand, promotes growth. One of the chief social justifications of great inequality of wealth is, therefore, removed.
 
That said, one wouldnt want to get rid of money altogether:
 
[D]angerous human proclivities can be canalised into comparatively harmless channels by the existence of opportunities for money-making and private wealth, which, if they cannot be satisfied in this way, may find their outlet in cruelty, the reckless pursuit of personal power and authority, and other forms of self-aggrandisement. It is better that a man should tyrannise over his bank balance than over his fellow-citizens; and whilst the former is sometimes denounced as being but a means to the latter, sometimes at least it is an alternative.
 
Let us imagine these policies are implemented. The government lowers interest rates so that theres full employment. Expected return would then probably fall steadily keep it there, unless theres an increase in the propensity to consume (including by the State).
 
At this point, expected return might be just enough to cover the costs of production, plus a little for risk and skill  just like other goods.
 
Now, though this state of affairs would be quite compatible with some measure of individualism, yet it would mean the euthanasia of the rentier, and, consequently, the euthanasia of the cumulative oppressive power of the capitalist to exploit the scarcity-value of capital. Interest today rewards no genuine sacrifice, any more than does the rent of land. The owner of capital can obtain interest because capital is scarce, just as the owner of land can obtain rent because land is scarce. But whilst there may be intrinsic reasons for the scarcity of land, there are no intrinsic reasons for the scarcity of capital. An intrinsic reason for such scarcity, in the sense of a genuine sacrifice which could only be called forth by the offer of a reward in the shape of interest, would not exist, in the long run, except in the event of the individual propensity to consume proving to be of such a character that net saving in conditions of full employment comes to an end before capital has become sufficiently abundant. But even so, it will still be possible for communal saving through the agency of the State to be maintained at a level which will allow the growth of capital up to the point where it ceases to be scarce.
 
I see, therefore, the rentier aspect of capitalism as a transitional phase which will disappear when it has done its work. And with the disappearance of its rentier aspect much else in it besides will suffer a sea-change. It will be, moreover, a great advantage of the order of events which I am advocating, that the euthanasia of the rentier, of the functionless investor, will be nothing sudden, merely a gradual but prolonged continuance of what we have seen recently in Great Britain, and will need no revolution.
 
Thus we might aim in practice (there being nothing in this which is unattainable) at an increase in the volume of capital until it ceases to be scarce, so that the functionless investor will no longer receive a bonus; and at a scheme of direct taxation which allows the intelligence and determination and executive skill of the financier, the entrepreneur et hoc genus omen (who are certainly so fond of their craft that their labour could be obtained much cheaper than at present), to be harnessed to the service of the community on reasonable terms of reward.
 
At the same time we must recognise that only experience can show how far the common will, embodied in the policy of the State, ought to be directed to increasing and supplementing the inducement to invest; and how far it is safe to stimulate the average propensity to consume, without foregoing our aim of depriving capital of its scarcity-value within one or two generations. It may turn out that the propensity to consume will be so easily strengthened by the effects of a falling rate of interest, that full employment can be reached with a rate of accumulation little greater than at present. In this event a scheme for the higher taxation of large incomes and inheritances might be open to the objection that it would lead to full employment with a rate of accumulation which was reduced considerably below the current level. I must not be supposed to deny the possibility, or even the probability, of this outcome. For in such matters it is rash to predict how the average man will react to a changed environment. If, however, it should prove easy to secure an approximation to full employment with a rate of accumulation not much greater than at present, an outstanding problem will at least have been solved. And it would remain for separate decision on what scale and by what means it is right and reasonable to call on the living generation to restrict their consumption, so as to establish in course of time, a state of full investment for their successors.
 
Now the State will still have to guide things; it seems unlikely that just controlling interest rates will be enough to ensure this utopian state of affairs. Instead, it might turn out a somewhat comprehensive socialisation of investment will prove the only means of securing an approximation to full employment; though this need not exclude all manner of compromises and of devices by which public authority will co-operate with private initiative. Still, this is a comparatively conservative claim:
 
But beyond this no obvious case is made out for a system of State Socialism which would embrace most of the economic life of the community. It is not the ownership of the instruments of production which it is important for the State to assume. If the State is able to determine the aggregate amount of resources devoted to augmenting the instruments and the basic rate of reward to those who own them, it will have accomplished all that is necessary. Moreover, the necessary measures of socialisation can be introduced gradually and without a break in the general traditions of society. []
 
Whilst, therefore, the enlargement of the functions of government, involved in the task of adjusting to one another the propensity to consume and the inducement to invest, would seem to a nineteenth-century publicist or to a contemporary American financier to be a terrific encroachment on individualism, I defend it, on the contrary, both as the only practicable means of avoiding the destruction of existing economic forms in their entirety and as the condition of the successful functioning of individual initiative.
 
For if effective demand is deficient, not only is the public scandal of wasted resources intolerable, but the individual enterpriser who seeks to bring these resources into action is operating with the odds loaded against him. The game of hazard which he plays is furnished with many zeros, so that the players as a whole will lose if they have the energy and hope to deal all the cards. Hitherto the increment of the worlds wealth has fallen short of the aggregate of positive individual savings; and the difference has been made up by the losses of those whose courage and initiative have not been supplemented by exceptional skill or unusual good fortune. But if effective demand is adequate, average skill and average good fortune will be enough.
 
And, if our theory does work and we end up with full employment, then we return to the world of the classical economic theory, whose only flaw was assuming that full employment was the only possible state of affairs. It is in determining the volume, not the direction, of actual employment that the existing system has broken down.
 
Is the fulfilment of these ideas a visionary hope? Have they insufficient roots in the motives which govern the evolution of political society? Are the interests which they will thwart stronger and more obvious than those which they will serve?
 
I do not attempt an answer in this place. It would need a volume of a different character from this one to indicate even in outline the practical measures in which they might be gradually clothed. But if the ideas are correct  an hypothesis on which the author himself must necessarily base what he writes  it would be a mistake, I predict, to dispute their potency over a period of time. At the present moment people are unusually expectant of a more fundamental diagnosis; more particularly ready to receive it; eager to try it out, if it should be even plausible. But apart from this contemporary mood, the ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly understood. Indeed the world is ruled by little else. Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back. I am sure that the power of vested interests is vastly exaggerated compared with the gradual encroachment of ideas. Not, indeed, immediately, but after a certain interval; for in the field of economic and political philosophy there are not many who are influenced by new theories after they are twenty-five or thirty years of age, so that the ideas which civil servants and politicians and even agitators apply to current events are not likely to be the newest. But, soon or late, it is ideas, not vested interests, which are dangerous for good or evil.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 22, 2009
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September 24, 2009
 
Title: Keynes, Explained Briefly
 
If you read the economic textbooks, youll find that the job market is a market like any other. Theres supply (workers) and demand (employers). And the incredible power of market competition pushes the price (wages) to where those two meet. Thus massive unemployment is about as likely as huge unsold piles of wheat: if people arent buying, its just because youre setting the price too high.
 
And yet, as I write, 17.5% of the country is unemployed. Are they all just insisting on being paid too much? Economists are forced into the most ridiculous explanations. Perhaps people just dont know where the jobs are, some say. (Maybe the government should run ads for Craigslist.) Or maybe it just takes time for all those former house-builders to learn new jobs. (This despite the fact that unemployment is up in all industries.) But theyre typically forced back to the fundamental conclusion of the textbook: that people are just demanding to be paid too much. It might be for the most innocent of reasons, but facts are facts.
 
John Maynard Keynes great insight was to see that all of this was nonsense. The job market is a very special market, because the people who get bought are also the people doing all the buying. After all, why is it that people are hired to farm wheat? Its because, at the end of the day, other people want to buy it. But if lots of people are out of a job, theyre doing their best to save money, which means cutting back on purchases. And if they cut back on purchases, that means there are fewer people for business to sell to, which means businesses cut back on jobs.
 
Clearly something is badly wrong with the basic economic theory. So lets go through Keynes masterpiece, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, and understand his theory of how the economy works.
 
When you get your paycheck at the end of the week, you spend it. But presumably you dont spend all of it  you put some money away to save, like you were told as a child. Saving is seen as a great national virtue  thus all those Public Service Announcements with talking piggy banks. Everyone knows why: put some money away today and itll be worth more tomorrow.
 
But theres a kind of illusion involved in this. Money isnt worth anything on its own, its only useful because it can buy things. And it buys things because it pays other people to make them for you. But you cant save people in your bank account  if fifteen million people are out of work, they cant put their time in a piggy bank for when things are looking up. The work they could have done is lost forever.
 
So yes, some people can save while others borrow from them  you can let your neighbor buy two iPods in exchange for letting you buy four next year  but the country, as a whole, cannot. At the end of the day, someone has to buy the things we can make. But if everyones saving, that means people arent buying. Which means the people making stuff are out of a job.
 
Its a vicious cycle: if people buy less, companies make less, which means people get paid less, which means people buy less. And so on, until were all out of work. (Thankfully it doesnt get that bad  but only because some people are refusing to lower their wages. The thing that mainstream economists said was causing unemployment is actually preventing it!)
 
But this cycle can be run in reverse. Imagine Donald Trump hires unemployed people to build him a new skyscraper. Theyre suddenly getting paid again, which means they can start spending again. And each dollar they spend goes to a different business, which can start hiring people itself. And then those newly-hired people start spending the new money they make, and so on. This is the multiplier: each dollar that gets spent provides even more than one dollars worth of boost to the economy.
 
Now lets look at things from the employers side  say you run an truck factory. How do you decide how many trucks to make? Obviously, you make as many as you think you can profitably sell. But theres no way to calculate something like that  its a question about what customers will do in the future. Theres literally no way to know. And yet, obviously, trucks get made.
 
It used to be, Keynes says, that wealthy men just thought investing was the manly thing to do. They werent going to sit around and calculate what kind of bonds yielded the greatest expected return. Bonds are for wusses. They were real men. They were going to take their money and build a railroad.
 
But they dont make rich people like that anymore. Nowadays, they put their money in the stock market. Instead of boldly picking one great enterprise to invest in, they shift their money around from week to week (or hire someone else to do it for them). So these days, its the stock market that stimulates most new investment.
 
But how does the stock market figure out what profits are supposed to be? In truth, it has no more clue than you do. Its really just based around a convention. We all pretend that whatever the stock price is now is a pretty decent guess and then we only have to worry about the various factors that will cause the stock price to change. We forget about the most basic fact: that nobody has any clue what the stock price should be to begin with.
 
So instead of people trying their best to figure out which businesses will make money in the future, and investing in those, we have people who try to figure out which stock prices will change in the future, and trying to get there first. Its like a giant game of musical chairs  everybodys rushing not to be the one left standing when the music stops.
 
Or, you could say, its like those newspaper competitions where you have to pick the six prettiest faces from a hundred photographs. The prize goes to the person who picks the faces that are most picked, so you dont pick the faces you find prettiest, but instead the faces you think everyone else will find prettiest. But its not even that, since everyone else is doing the same thing  youre actually picking the faces you think everyone else will think everyone else will find prettiest! And no doubt there are some people who take this even further.
 
You might think this means that someone who actually did the work and tried to calculate expected profits would clean up, taking money from all the people playing musical chairs. But its not so simple. Calculating expected profits is really quite hard. To make money, youd have to be unusually good at it, and it seems much easier to just guess what everyone else will do.
 
And even if you were somehow good at guessing long-term profits, where would you get the money to invest? Its in the fundamental nature of your strategy that your investments seem crazy to everyone else. If youre successful, theyll write it off as a lucky fluke. And when your stocks arent doing well (which is most of the time  theyre long-term picks, remember), people will take this as evidence of your failures and pull their money out.
 
The scary thing is that the more open our markets get, the faster people can move their money around and the more trading is based on this kind of speculation instead of serious analysis. And thats scary because  recall  the whole point of the stock market is to decide the crucial question of what we, as a society, should build for the future. As Keynes says, When the capital development of a country becomes a by-product of the activities of a casino, the job is likely to be ill-done.
 
The best solution is probably a small tax on each trade. Not only would this raise a ton of money (modern estimates suggest even a tiny tax could raise $100 billion a year), it would help redirect all the brains on Wall Street from these wasteful games of musical chairs to something actually useful.
 
But even if we solve the problem of the stock market, theres still some irreducible uncertainty. Because whether new investment makes sense always depends on whether the economy will be doing well in the future. And whether the economy is doing well depends on whether theres new investment. So, at the end of the day, investment doesnt depend simply on a careful calculation of future expected yield, but on our animal spirits, our optimism about the future. Its this factor that exaggerates booms and deepens slumps and makes it hard to get out of a bad situation.
 
Even more perversely, it means economic performance depends in no small part on keeping businessmen happy. If electing Obama gets businessmen depressed, they might pull back their investments and send the economy into a slump. It doesnt even have to be intentional  they may very well believe that a President Obama is bad for the economy. But when you have a system that only works when businesspeople feel good, their fears become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
 
The result, Keynes suggests, is that the government will have to step in to prevent the economy from crashing every time rich people get a bit of indigestion.
 
So thats how we calculate the income side of things, now what about costs? Most costs are pretty clear  you need to buy equipment and hire people. But since you need to make stuff now that you can only sell in the future, one of your big costs is going to be money to use in the meantime. And the cost of money is just the interest rate. (If you get a loan for a million dollars at 5% interest, youre essentially paying $50,000 for the right to use the money now.)
 
Thus lowering interest rates increases investment  it reduces the cost of getting money, which reduces the cost of making stuff, which means more things can make a profit. And if more things can make a profit, more things get made, which means more people get hired. So what determines the interest rate?
 
Well, if the interest rate is the cost of money, the obvious answer is the amount of money in circulation. If theres a lot of money lying around, you can get some pretty cheap. Which means that, fundamentally, unemployment is caused by a lack of money: more money (assuming people dont hoard it all) means lower interest rates, lower interest rates (assuming expected profits dont crash) means higher investment, higher investment (assuming people dont stop buying) means more employment, and more employment means higher prices, which means were going to need more money.
 
Money is created by the central bank (the Federal Reserve in the US), which decides what they want the interest rate to be and then prints new money (which they use to buy up government debt) until the interest rate is where they want. To get the economy back on track, all they have to do is keep lowering interest rates until investment picks up again and everyone has a job.
 
But theres one catch: the interest rate cant go below zero. (Keynes didnt think this problem was very likely, but in the US were facing it right now.) What do you do if the interest rate is zero and people are still out of work?
 
Well, you can pray that billionaires will start hiring us all to build them giant mansions, but thats no way to run a country. The government has to step in. Instead of waiting for billionaires to build pleasure-domes, the government can hire people to build things we all need  roads, schools, houses, high-speed Internet connections. Although, honesty, it doesnt have to be things we all need. They could hire people to do anything. This is why inspecting the stimulus money for waste is so ridiculous  waste is perfectly fine, the important thing is to get the money into circulation so that the economy can get back on track.
 
Another good solution is redistributing income. Poor people are a lot more likely to spend money than billionaires. If we take some money from the billionaires and give it to the poor, the poor will use it to buy things they need and people will get jobs making those things.
 
Remember that money is just a kind of illusion. In reality, there are just people who want things and people who make things. But were stuck in a completely ridiculous situation: there are lots of people who desperately want jobs making things  theyre literally not doing anything else  while at the same time there are lots of people who desperately want things made. It seems ridiculous not to do something about this just because some people have all the little green sheets of paper!
 
Capitalism seems to go through frustrating cycles of booms and busts. Some people say the solution is just to prevent the booms  raise interest rates so the party doesnt get out of hand and we wont all be sorry the next morning. Keynes disagrees: the remedy is not to be found in abolishing booms and thus keeping us permanently in a semi-slump; but in abolishing slumps and thus keeping us permanently in a quasi-boom.
 
Think back to the dot-com era, when venture capitalists were spending all their money laying fiber-optic cable under the street. The right solution wasnt for the Fed to raise interest rates until even punch-drunk venture capitalists could realize all this investment in fiber wouldnt be profitable. The right solution was to take their money away. Give it to the poor, who will spend it on something useful, like food and clothing.
 
So those are Keynes prescriptions for a successful economy: low interest rates, government investment, and redistribution to the poor. And, for a time  from around the 1940s to the 1970s  thats kind of what we did. The results were magical: the economy grew strongly, inequality fell away, everyone had jobs.
 
But, starting in the 1970s, the rich staged a counterattack. They didnt like watching inequality  and their wealth  melt away. There was a resurgence in classical economics, Keynes was declared to have been debunked, and interest rates were raised drastically, throwing millions out of work. The economy tanked, inequality soared, and things have never been the same since. For a while people talked about levels of inequality that hadnt been seen since the 1920s. Then they talked about a recession the size of which hadnt been seen since the 1930s.
 
Once again, Keynes provides us with the instructions on how to get out of this mess. The question is whether well follow them.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 24, 2009
 
This essay started off kind of interesting and then disintegrated into utter ignorance.  There are so many problems with it that to correct it would require another essay of equal or greater length.
 
posted by Scott
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
Im curious, have you read General Theory?
 
posted by Matt C
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
Scott apparently has an attention span issue.
 
I thought this was a fairly accurate coverage of the surprisingly simplistic nature of how the rich have coerced the government to work for them and conservatives to vote for them.
 
We used to be able to count on Republicans to provide strong leadership for us. But they are now just a bunch of warmongering haters that work for the rich. That leaves us with the weakling Democrats that wont stand up for anything difficult.  How did things become so polarized?
 
posted by Bob
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
Keynes, the monetary genius that brought us deficit spending and thus our current deficit.  Sorry, Mr. K., the government interfering has always done more harm than good, whether it is to the economy or our liberty
 
posted by Brian
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
As I write, 17.5% of the country is unemployed. Are they all just insisting on being paid too much?
 
Yes.
 
posted by Khan
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
I like it as a summary, but Keynesianism didnt fail because of the counterattack (the counter-attack had been around since the Thirties). Keynesianism failed because it couldnt explain stagflation, and consequently the Seventies economy was a mess and the left-right consensus on Keynesian economics broke down.
 
But that event is outside of the context of the General Theory
 
posted by Danny OBrien
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
I dont have time to read the entire article, but suffice it to say that Keynes has been discredited. He is still popular only because it gives the egghead who run our government intellectual cover for their idiotic ideas.
 
Friedman started life as a Keynesian, and realized it was full of poop and moved on. Read his critiques and you will understand.
 
(FDR followed Keynes and economists today say that those policies extended by depression by 5-7 years.)
 
posted by KeithCu
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
Here is an interesting quote:
 
http://www.sddt.com/Commentary/article.cfm?Commentary_ID=189&SourceCode=20090212tzc
 
FDRs Treasury secretary, Henry Morgenthau, told his fellow Democrats, We have tried spending money. We are spending more than we have ever spent before and it does not work. And I have just one interest, and if I am wrong  somebody else can have my job. I want to see this country prosperous. I want to see people get a job. I want to see people get enough to eat. We have never made good on our promises  I say after eight years of this administration, we have just as much unemployment as when we started  and an enormous debt to boot!
 
posted by KeithCu
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
Morgenthau was just wrong about that; unemployment was down 40% after eight years.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
Austrian economics: rational, pragmatic, simple, decentralized, and  best of all  intuitive.  QED.
 
posted by MTheKnife
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
Im with Scott. Keynes remedies cause more harm than good. I dont have time to address the whole thing but there are a couple points I cant let lie (sic).
 
The 1940s-1970s were not magical. The frequency of recessions and the stagflation it ended in should be enough to make this self evident. The causes of both the good and bad times in this period are debatable, but this definitely isnt a period to point to in defense of Keynesianism. Further, Keynesian influence in government and monetary policy held sway starting DURING the great depressionthats part of why the great depression lasted so long. Learn2History.
 
Second when you need to get more money into circulation, stealing from the rich and giving to the poor is not the answer. If the rich really do provide all the jobsas you claim they dothey will have neither incentive nor great ability to do so if youre taking away their hard earned money. Entrepreneurship is something that needs to be encouraged from every possible angle (not just the price of money angle) during rough times.
 
Further redistribution of wealth is theft. Pure and simple. It is morally unconscionable. If you steal, giving the money to charity doesnt make it right. The bright side is that you dont need to do it. If the wealthy really are hoarding money, all you have to do to prevent deflation is print enough to outpace them. Easy.
 
The rich are rich because they or their ancestors were smart and worked hard. Youre jealous of themso am Ibut the great part about a free society is that if we possess the talent and drive, we can work hard and become wealthy also. However if you agree to let their money be stolen and given to you for nothing, you will still be bankrupt morally.
 
I think the hardest part for people to understand is that the rich do NOT hate the poor. The poor keep themselves downusually through bad habits and ignorance. Have you noticed that lottery winners usually wind up poorer than they started? Bad habits and ignorance. I dont fault them for it, but I dont fault the rich either.
 
The rich dont want to keep the poor downand they dont need to to stay rich either. In fact many of the rich have great empathy, and do great works of charity with their money. Economics is NOT a zero sum game. Every transaction can be win/win. In fact in every transaction both parties always at least think theyre getting a benefit. Otherwise why would they trade? When people trade, both are better off, so what you really want to do promote is trade.
 
Like you said: money doesnt matter as much as having what we need and want. In todays society were all specialists producing lots more of what we build than we need for ourselves. Money and credit are the lubricants that allow us to trade what we have for what we want when its most convenient for everyone, but its the trade thats important. With enough trade, everyone gets what they need and what they want. Reduce the barriers to trade and you increase equality without resorting to theft or other things that reduce our incentive to exercise that power of production which benefits both ourselves and others.
 
posted by Ben
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
Im coming to believe that the single largest problem in the world is wealth.
 
Money is only a portable, storable form of power. If you have more money you have more power. Period.
 
What people always forget is that the necessities of life are small, almost trivial, and that death takes every one and every thing.
 
Id like to start with a tax reform. Say something like an income tax rate of one half of one percent per every $10,000. Or one tenth of one percent. The exact figure isnt that important.
 
At some point the rate would reach 100%. Anything earned over that amount (say $1 million or $2 million) would go to the IRS, with the proviso that anyone owing such a tax could instead distribute it among a selection of approved charities. Or start social businesses along the lines of what Muhammad Yunus has done.
 
Come to think of it, lets eliminate inheritance as well. I see no reason why a pile of money should go to ones relatives, either by blood or by law, or to a random person that happens to be named in a will.
 
Wealth never truly belongs to a person anyway. Thats only an illusion, a fiction. It comes from and belongs to all of us. For anyone who doesnt believe this, then please try to generate wealth without ever interacting with anyone else. Start by losing the power of speech and by forgetting everything you have learned from others.
 
The real point of life is to live, not to accumulate and wield power, but when one has power it is always used, and if used it is always misused at some point. The greater the power the greater the danger.
 
I think that at most no one should have an income more than five times the minimum. There will always be those who will not work, so they dont count, but for the rest of us, this could work.
 
We should put the focus on what we can do for others, not on what trinkets we own.
 
We should back away from the hate, fear, and greed that money and power generate. No one can use more than one shirt at a time, or one car, or one house. No one can eat more than one meal at a time, but we have come to use things to measure ourselves, and we hunger for more things, and for more of the power that goes with wealth. It never ceases.
 
The rich do hate the poor, because the rich are insecure and empty. If I am rich, and become poor, then I have no value, so I must hate the poor, and the not poor, and the merely comfortable, and the petite rich, and the super rich.  I can only be rich beyond all comprehension to have true value, and even then I will still be filled with hate, and fear, and greed because there is no true value in wealth.
 
There is no absolute victory in this race, and my wealth (and I) can vanish at any moment, so I must keep clawing after more, always.
 
Contrast this with the lives of those at the bottom. They may worry and fret, and work too hard, and have inconvenient lives but they are less fearful. They are always in sight of ruin and death and know that it comes to all of us. Their wealth is in their humanity, not in paint and gloss.
 
posted by Dave
 on September 25, 2009 #
 
Wealth = Energy 
Money = Token
 
Token has validity only if it is redeemable in what it represents.
 
Dollar is called petro dollar because value of dollar comes from its redeemability in oil, this is why USA had to conquer Iraq.
 
The day people/nations holding dollar cannot buy energy with dollar the currency will collapse like it is happening in Zimbabwe.
 
If Keynes was right zimbabwe currency crisis would not have happened and there was no need for USA to conquer Iraq.
 
Keynes general theory = big bull @#$%
 
posted by AntiK
 on September 25, 2009 #
 
Great article Aaron, brings out quite the mix of comments
 
Ben, your theft argument is not pure and simple. If you live in a democracy, then it is the right of the majority to decide what taxation to apply to profits. If it suits the majority to heavily tax the richest members of society, then all the more power too them. In fact there is a moral obligation for them to provide the most benefit for the majority, of course this would only work in a fair and equal political system
 
posted by Mal
 on September 25, 2009 #
 
I went to a talk by John Nash a few years ago and he summed up the notion of Kensian (for his purposes) as follows:
 
Heres a link to the talk: http://www.stat.psu.edu/~babu/nash/money.pdf
 
posted by Joshua Gay
 on September 25, 2009 #
 
Ummmm, yeah, which countrys unemployment rate is 17.5%
http://www.google.com/publicdata?ds=usunemployment&met=unemployment_rate&tdim=true&q=unemployment+rate
 
posted by Eric
 on September 25, 2009 #
 
Wealthiest 1% already pay 40% of all federal income tax.  The poorest 50% contribute 3% of income tax.  You say the rich staged a counterattck since the 70s, but dont back it up with facts.  What burden increase would you suggest for people like Steve Jobs of Apple for creating a global brand from the USA?  If theres no point in studying hard and then working hard, how many more will take 9 to 5 public sector jobs instead, and who will be left to pay their salaries?
 
posted by ontheotherhand
 on September 25, 2009 #
 
Dave scares me.
 
posted by Neville
 on September 25, 2009 #
 
I think it is a brilliantly written article. Keynes himself was a brilliant writer which obviously helped sway people to his way of thinking.
 
Macroeconomics is extremely complex, think the weather but with artificial feedback mechanisms. If you have read a book deep simplicity you would come to understand that the global economy is just another naturally occurring system on the edge of chaos just like the rest of nature. The random rise and falls of economies follow the same distribution and pattern as the rest of the natural world. The stock market for instance follows the same pattern of build up and avalanche as a sand pyramid. Trying to predict and manipulate a system operating on the edge of chaos is fraught with difficulty. The only thing predictable about such systems is their unpredictability.
 
I think what is out of synch in the economy at the moment is that money through the use of derivatives and other financial instruments has become disjointed from tangible goods and services. More wealth is being created in the money trade than through the production of goods and services. This new wealth is dependant on the mood of the market so we are seeing more volatility as its valuation fluctuates. Derivatives should be taxed out of existence, business should have to take risks head on.
 
posted by Mike
 on September 25, 2009 #
 
The best part of this essay is near the end, when Aaron plainly admits that he views theft as a reasonable solution.  I wish more politicians were as up front about their wickedness.
 
posted by Joe Hewitt
 on September 26, 2009 #
 
There was a resurgence in classical economics, Keynes was declared to have been debunked, and interest rates were raised drastically, throwing millions out of work.
 
 You are uninformed.  We have near negative real interest rates as do other countries and the end to this bust is not in sight.  Keynesian necessarily  leads to high interest rates as the only means of soaking up excess money supply.
 
The rich got that way for a reason.  Let them run things because you poor people arent qualified.
 
posted by J Maynard
 on September 26, 2009 #
 
I will provide a more academic response later, but for now, I want to talk about reality and not academics.  I own (with a few family members) two manufacturing enterprises.  We employ people and make goods that others buy directly and indirectly.  The profits everyone talks about taxing and redistributing (whether the Keynesian or some other quasi-socialist economist) are those we use to invest in the future.  We are less inclined to do ridiculous things with our excess money (unlike the venture capitalists who laid fiber that has gone to no use - although, there is an argument that says this was and will be good) because the spread between the cost of making our products and what we sell them for is smaller and we want to ensure a long and healthy future for ourselves and everyone who works for us.  For every dollar you take from us and give to someone else, you punish us for our success and limit our ability to invest in buildings, machines and equipment for future growth - which allows employment for more people.  Mind you, we do not grow for growths sake, but because we are successful at the things we do and have more work come our way (or find new products to manufacture).  We have a far more positive effect on the economy by employing people than you do by handing our money out.  We give ourselves and other purpose and that is something socialism will never be capable of doing.  You make a fatal mistake in your theory by stating But when you have a system that only works when businesspeople feel good, their fears become a self-fulfilling prophecy.  Businesspeople are only one cog on the gear for economic activity.  People like myself continue to have a job to do whether or not we like Obama.  It is in our personal lives that we decide whether or not to take part in trade.  A businesss primary purpose is to trade, so by not doing so, it doesnt accomplish what it is meant for and dies.
So, go ahead.  Dont believe me and assume you know better what to do with my wealth and my businesss profits.  When the motivation to work hard and keep a business running continues to be eroded by your policy choices, either I will close shop or move to a place where what I do is allowed - if I wish to even continue.  I and my kind represent a clear majority of our economy (small to medium businesses - and included in this are all those who support us by working for us), not the super rich, the crazy venture capitalists and people who take risks with others money.  People assume that the examples you give (e.g. crazy venture capitalists, rich McMansion building idiots, and wealthy people who only invest speculatively) are representative of the majority out there.  They arent.
 
posted by Steve Fettig
 on September 27, 2009 #
 
The problem with getting rid of inheritance is that when a man builds a business (say a farm) and wants to hand it off to his children to run it, that cannot happen because the entire effort would get taken over by the government. Inheritance taxes are terrible for the economy!
 
And whether wealth belongs to just one person, or to all of us: do you really want the idiots in Congress to spend money? Id rather have Bill Gates spend his billions!
 
Marxism / socialism never works. Havent you advocates ever studied history?
 
And anyone who believes in Keynes or Marxism should read Milton Friedman. You need to read both sides. What made the US the worlds only superpower in 200 years was its free economy, not its federal government. A welfare net is okay, but we are moving towards a welfare state.
 
I find it interesting that Obama is arguing for a public option (government take-over) of healthcare to increase choice and competition. Note that the DOJ in its trial with MS never argued that the government should get into the software biz to increase choice and competition, and if they had, they would have been laughed out of the courtroom. When the government runs healthcare, our lives become a line item in the budget.
 
Im glad to see there are some free market advocates here!! Im constantly amazed that geeks, who are notoriously anti-establishment,  advocate that we all hand over our property and liberty to a monopolistic, unaccountable bureaucracy that Microsoft would be jealous of!
 
posted by KeithCu
 on September 28, 2009 #
 
Wow, Keynes is like flypaper for cranks - they come out of the woodwork. Nice work. Not even the near total collapse of the neoclassical consensus is enough to shake them to their sense.
 
posted by Erik
 on September 30, 2009 #
 
waste is perfectly fine, the important thing is to get the money into circulation so that the economy can get back on track.
 
I think you are missing an important point here. The money that is being spent is not simply created. It is borrowed, and must later be paid back with interest.
 
So if I borrow $10,000 and spend it on eating out and partying, then I have a good time for a while, but later have to pay it all back and then some, so I go through a longer period where I dont have enough money to even eat well, let alone party. On the other hand if I borrow that money to improve my future standing: get a degree, start a business, etc. Then it is money well spent.
 
The same is true for the US Gov. If we spend money on buying goods from the people we are borrowing the money fromwell, you can probably see without my explanation how bad an idea that is. Even if we spend it domestically, but on things that do not increase productivity or the velocity of money, we will create a bubble and another burst.
 
Any money the government spends should be spent on improving our infrastructure or our workforce to improve future economic potential or productivity.
 
So, we should spend on Education (specifically Math and Science education), and on roads, and heavy rail, and on upgrading our ports, and on laying down better data carrying infrastructure.
 
However, consider this: when Bush inherited the Clinton recession, he cut taxes to the wealthy, increased government spending and encouraged the fed to lower interest ratesand arguably created a bubble that resulted in the current recession. You could argue that Clinton did the same with the recession he inherited. (Cut taxes, increased spending, and encouraged low interest rates).
So what is Obama doing with the recession he inherited? Keeping taxes where Bush put them, increasing government spending (To amazing levels) and encouraging/bullying the fed to keep interest rates low.
 
So let me ask this: if every president, Demican or Republicrat follows this same playbook expecting a different outcomeisnt that the definition of insanity?
 
I guess what I am saying is that what Obama is doing is not Change. Its the same as Bush with minor differences of focus. So either Bush was Keynesian or Obama is notin either case, we are just going to get another boom and bust cycle.
 
posted by Charles
 on October  5, 2009 #
 
I think you are missing an important point here. The money that is being spent is not simply created. It is borrowed, and must later be paid back with interest.
 
I think youre missing an important point here  injecting money into the economy increases overall GDP by more than that (because of the multiplier), thus increasing tax revenue, thus making it profitable for the government to take out a loan. It doesnt matter how the money is being injected  it can be wasteful or not.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 11, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September 23, 2009
 
Title: Redesign
 
I was going through my weblog archives the other day and found an early post Id written nine years ago (in yet another piece of blogging software Id written myself). But what was even more shocking than the notion that Id been blogging for over a decade was that my web design back then was better than it was today.
 
This really kept nagging at me, so I took a couple hours tonight to do a redesign. I still have very little in the way of positive artistic talent, so its nothing impressive, but I do hope that it will keep me from recoiling in horror from my own weblog. My apologies to everyone I borrowed design features from.
 
Feel free to use this thread to comment on the redesign.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 23, 2009
 
It looks like blockquote isnt being styled; the few paragraphslong quote at the end of your previous post isnt being indented (or italicized or anything else).
 
All in all, I liked the old design better. Unfortunately, I cant be very helpful in explaining why; I think I have decent negative and positive taste, at least regarding web and graphic design, but I still have trouble justifying my preferences. But Ill be watching to see if anyone else agrees with my intuitions.
 
posted by Adam
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
Hrm I honestly think the old one was more readable.
 
posted by icey
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
Sans serif please, my eyes are glazing over.
 
posted by 
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
I like the serif font and the decent coloring, but the font size should be a bit larger and for sure it would be a good idea to reduce the width of the text on the main page in a similar way as in the comment section. As a rule of thumb 2-3 alphabets in length will be good for reading comfort.
As your site is 100% typography, this might be a useful site with some hints for you: http://www.markboulton.co.uk/journal/comments/five-simple-steps-to-better-typography
 
posted by Fabian
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
Looks good!
 
The font size should be slightly larger, and the line-height should be longer in proportion to the font size.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
I like the minimalist design. Loads really fast on the iPhone, even on edge. +1 for increased line-height.
 
posted by Tim
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
Aaron, just a note: in my experience most readers dislike redesigns, so youll always get comments like the ones above  they want the old design back. This has to do with people being used to a certain way of reading and being jarred by a new experience.
 
I didnt have a problem with the old design, but the new one is nice!
 
Your content is what matters most  keep writing great stuff!
 
posted by Leo
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
The font is awfully tiny (by default).
 
The creamy color I think I can live with. :P
 
posted by Tommi
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
I think its nice. Id just increase the font size a bit (and adjust column widths accordingly). Beside that, there isnt much to envy to the previous one. Good job.
 
posted by Michel Fortin
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
I read it all in RSS anyway, so while I also liked the old design better, dont count my vote for much.
 
posted by PJ
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
Aaron, I dont much care for the yellow background.  I preferred your black on white scheme.  Overall, I actually prefer your former  design, typeface, and overall look and feel.
 
posted by Mark
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
Aaron:
 
I would also prefer sans-serif, since serifs just render horribly on Linux, but Im in a minority as far as that is concerned since IMO they look tolerable in Windows and OS X. But the problem remains that rendering serifs in few pixels just doesnt work well  either the serifs are overemphasised (Windows) or they become blurry smudges (OS X). So if you want to keep the serif, you should spring at least a few more pixels for it.
 
If you switch to a sans-serif, there is no detail in the typeface that would require extra resolution to render well, so you can probably keep it at this size. In fact Ive found that if you space letters by a tiny amount (as in 0.075em or so  this needs a bit of experimentation), even really tiny font sizes remain readable  in a sans-serif.
 
What I really see no reason for, though, is that youve lined up the content along the left edge of the browser window and the title and navigation along the right edge  with (on my system) half a screen of empty space between them. That looks really careless. You should either centre the content + navigation in two columns in the middle of the page, or else have them both along the left edge.
 
Leo:
 
in my experience most readers dislike redesigns, so youll always get comments like the ones above  they want the old design back.
 
Are you seriously suggesting that people are commenting because they were attached to Aarons old (non-)design?
 
posted by Aristotle Pagaltzis
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
Actually, Ill try to be slightly helpful: One thing I preferred about the old design was the greater contrast and variety of colours. Now that everything is black, white, grey, and shades of the same pale yellow, it looks less visually interesting, and it requires more conscious effort to distinguish different parts of the pages structure.
 
posted by Adam
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
Command-+, Command-+, Command-+
 
Ah, much better.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
big step backward, IMO. In particular the tiny font.
 
posted by Dan Connolly
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
Well, I for one really like it. Props.
 
posted by Chris
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
I vote for a font a couple sizes bigger, a bit more leading, and a slightly wider column.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
The simplicity and minimalism is nice. Good background color.
 
Bigger text and sans-serif please!
 
posted by Andy Kish
 on September 25, 2009 #
 
I dig it.  Some of the more complexly structured sentences (multiple parenthesis, etc) in your outstanding Keynes post were more naturally digested by the eye than I think they would have been with the old design.
 
Props.
 
posted by Pablo
 on September 25, 2009 #
 
Nice color but too small.
 
posted by Srgio Nunes
 on September 27, 2009 #
 
MmmCheese!
 
I really like the #ffd background much better than white.  DLed and installed the Thomas Paine font so now I can enjoy the complete Raw Thought experience.  Did like the bigger font of the previous style though.
 
posted by James Hardy
 on September 28, 2009 #
 
I like the redesign. At first I thought the column width and font were a little constrained. But, then I realized that when zoomed in (on font only), things were perfect for me.
 
I recommend to those finding the font too small or the columns to thin, to just Ctrl++ a couple of times :-)
 
posted by Joshua Gay
 on October  2, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September 21, 2009
 
Title: The New Science of Causation
 
It seems like each new day brings another one of those headlines: regular sleep linked to life expectancy, playing video games associated with surgical prowess, bullies at risk of becoming criminals, and does breastfeeding reduce a babys blood pressure? (the old rhetorical question gambit). Sometimes the articles are clear: the research has only found a correlation between two variables  breastfeeding and low blood pressure were found together. But more often, they imply that causation is at work  that breastfeeding causes lower blood pressure.
 
Youve surely heard that old statistics adage: correlation does not imply causation. Just because breastfeeding and low blood pressure are found together doesnt mean the first caused the second. Perhaps the second caused the first (moms might prefer to keep breastfeeding calmer babies) or some other thing caused both of them (maybe moms who dont work both tend to breastfeed and stress their kids less). You cant tell from correlation alone.
 
Indeed, the philosopher David Hume argued that we could never know whether causation was at work. Solidity, extension, motion; these qualities are all complete in themselves, and never point out any other event which may result from them, he wrote. But not causation: One event follows another; but we never can observe any tie between them. They seem conjoined, but never connected.
 
And, as philosophers since Plato and Sextus Empiricus have argued, such evidence can deceive us. Imagine finding a button and, each time you press it, a beep is heard. Normally, wed assume that the button always causes the beep. But wed be wrong  one day the power goes out and the button does nothing.
 
Which is why, centuries later, Karl Pearson, the founder of mathematical statistics, banned the notion of causality from the discipline, calling it a fetish amidst the inscrutable arcana of modern science and insisting that just by understanding simple correlation one grasped the essence of the conception of association between cause and effect.
 
His followers have kept it banished ever since. Considerations of causality should be treated as they have always been in statistics: preferably not at all, wrote a former president of the Biometric Society. It would be very healthy if more researchers abandon thinking of and using terms such as cause and effect, insisted another prominent social scientist.
 
And there the matter has stayed. Causality is a concept as meaningless as the soul and just as inappropriate for modern mathematical science. And yet, somehow, this doesnt seem quite right. If causation is nothing but a meaningless word that laypeople have layered over correlation, then why the ceaseless insistence that correlation does not imply causation? Why are our thoughts filled with causal comments (he made me do it!) and never correlational ones?
 
The result is exceptionally strange. Statistics has no mathematical way to express the notion mud does not cause rain. It can say mud is correlated with rain (i.e. that theres a high probability of seeing mud if you see rain), no problem, but expressing the simple causal concept  the kind of thing any five-year-old would know  is impossible.
 
Statisticians may have never had to confront this problem but, luckily for us, Artificial Intelligence researchers have. It turns out if youre making a robot, having a notion of causality is essential  not just because its the only way to understand the humans, but because its the only way to get anything done! How are you supposed to turn the lights on if you dont know that its the light-switch and not the clicking noise that causes it?
 
The result is that in recent years several teams of AI researchers have turned their focus from building robots to building mathematical tools for dealing with causality. At the forefront is Judea Pearl (author of the book Causality, Cambridge University Press) and his group at UCLA and Clark Glymour (author of The Minds Arrows, MIT Press), Peter Spirtes, and their colleagues at Carnegie Mellon. The result is a quiet revolution in the field of statistics  one most practicing statisticians are still unaware of.
 
They started by dismissing Platos skepticism about the problem. Granted, they say, we may never know for sure whether the button always causes the beep, but thats too stringent a demand. Science never knows anything for sure  the best we can hope for is extracting the most knowledge from the evidence we have. Or, as William James put it, To know is one thing, and to know for certain that we know is another.
 
Next, they created a new mathematical function to formalize our notion of causality: do(). do expresses the notion of intervening and actually trying something. Thus, to mathematically express the notion that mud does not cause rain, we can say P(rain | do(mud=true)) = P(rain)  in other words, the chance of rain given that you made it muddy is the same as the chance of rain in general.
 
But causes rarely comes in pairs like these  more often it comes in complicated chains: clouds cause rain which causes both mud and wet clothing and the latter causes people to find a change of clothes. And so the researchers express these as networks, usually called causal Bayes nets or graphical causal models, which show each thing (clouds, rain, mud) as a node and the causal relationships as arrows between them:
 
And all this was just the warm-up act. Their real breakthrough was this: just as kids can discover causes by observation, computers can discern causes from data. Now obviously the easiest way to do this is just to measure what happens when you do(X=x) directly  this, for example, is what randomized controlled trials do. Kids do it by dropping a fork on the floor and seeing if this causes Mom to pick it up; scientists do it by randomly giving some people a real drug and others just a placebo. The result is that we can be sure of the cause  after all, it was we who dropped the fork and gave out the drug; nothing else could be sneaking in and causing it.
 
But in most cases we dont have this luxury. Wed like to know whether a new tax policy will cause the economy to tank before we enact it; wed like to know whether smoking causes cancer without forcing kids to smoke; and even in randomized controlled trials, we can give half the patients the real drug, but we cant make them take it. If the drug being tested makes someone so horribly sick that they stop taking it and then get better, drug trials still count that as a victory for the drug!
 
Obviously we cant always know such things just from observing, but in a surprising number of cases we can. And the researchers have developed a mathematical method  called the do-calculus  for determining just when you can. Feed it a Bayes network of variables, their relationships, and their values, and it will return back what it knows and with what certainty.
 
Thus, in an example Pearl frequently uses, tobacco companies used to argue that the correlation between smoking and cancer was simply because there were certain genes that made people both more likely to smoke and more likely to get cancer. It didnt matter if they quit smoking  their genes would lead cancer to get them anyway. Pearl shows that if we assume only smoking causes tar deposits on the lungs and the tar deposits are the only way smoking causes cancer, we can simply measure the tar deposits and calculate whether the tobacco companies are right.
 
Or, in another example in his book Causality, he analyzes data from a study on a cholesterol-reducing drug. Since whether people got the placebo or not is unassociated with any other variables (because it was randomly assigned) if we merely assume that receiving the real drug has some influence on whether people take it, we can calculate the effectiveness of the drug even with imperfect compliance. Indeed, we can even estimate how effective the drug would have been for people who were assigned it but didnt take it!
 
And thats not all  Peter Spirtes and Clark Glymour have developed an algorithm (known as PC, for Peter-Clark) that, given just the data, will do its best to calculate the causal network behind it. You can download the software implementing it, called TETRAD IV, for free from their departments website  it even has a nice graphical interface for drawing and displaying the networks.
 
As an experiment, I fed it some data from the IRS about 2005 income tax returns. It informed me that the percentage people donate to charity is correlated with the number of dependents they have, which in turn correlates with how much people receive from EITC. That amount, along with average income, causes how many people are on EITC. Average income is correlated with the tax burden which is correlated with inequality. All interesting and reasonable  and the result of just a few minutes work.
 
The applications for such tools are endless. As Pearl points out, they have the possibility to radically improved how statistics are used in medicine, epidemiology, economics, sociology, and law. And, as Glymour observes, it lets us better understand results in neuroscience and psychology. Take The Bell Curve, the 1992 bestseller that argued blacks had lower IQs, causing poorer performance in school and thus lower-paying jobs and more crime. Glymour shows, by applying the do-calculus, these results only hold if you assume that there are no other interactions between the variables (e.g. that parental attitude toward learning doesnt affect both IQ and performance in school). But the PC algorithm and TETRAD IV can demonstrate otherwise.
 
Such results may be a revolution in social science, but compared to building human-like robots, theyre childs play. Thats certainly the impression one gets from Pearl. Discussing his work at a conference of Artificial Intelligence researchers, he said:
 
One of the reasons I find these areas to be fertile grounds to try out new ideas is that, unlike AI, tangible rewards can be reaped from solving relative small problems. Problems involving barely 4 to 5 variables, which we in AI regard as toy-problems, carry tremendous payoffs in public health and social science.
 
Billions of dollars are invested each year on various public-health studies: Is chocolate ice-cream good for you or bad for you? Would red wine increase or decrease your heart rate? etc. etc.
 
The same applies to the social sciences. Would increasing police budget decrease or increase crime rates? Is the Colorado school incident due to TV violence or failure of public education? The Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research has distributed about 800 gigabytes worth of such studies in 1993 alone.
 
Unfortunately the causal-analytical methodology currently available to researchers in these fields is rather primitive, and every innovation can make a tremendous difference. [] This has been changing recently as new techniques are beginning to emerge from AI laboratories. I predict that a quiet revolution will take place in the next decade in the way causality is handled in statistics, epidemiology, social science, economics, and business. While news of this revolution will never make it to DARPAs newsletter, and even NSF is not equipped to appreciate or support it, it will nevertheless have enormous intellectual and technological impact on our society.
 
For sciences sake, I hope hes right.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 21, 2009
 
Nice book report.
 
posted by 
 on September 22, 2009 #
 
You might be interested in this book. Probability Theory: The logic of Science by ET Jaynes
http://bayes.wustl.edu/etj/prob/book.pdf
 
Funny how it is still Aristotle vs Plato.
 
posted by Paul
 on September 22, 2009 #
 
Be cautious in interpreting results from a quick analysis.  Structure learning is a NP-hard problem and the heuristics used require ample iterations and data.
 
Also, there are many other apps/libs for learning causal structure from data:
 
posted by Abhik Shah
 on September 22, 2009 #
 
Thus, to mathematically express the notion that mud does not cause rain, we can say P(rain | do(mud=true)) = P(rain)  in other words, the chance of rain given that you made it muddy is the same as the chance of rain in general.  This makes sense, and I can see how the same interpretation could apply to the example of controlled trial of medications (P(lower cholesterol | do(pill=true)) > P(lower cholesterol) perhaps, meaning the chance that a persons cholesterol will decrease is greater if you make them take the pill in question), but how would you apply that to the example of The Bell Curve? It makes no sense to talk about the chance that a students performance in school will decrease given that you made him/her black. Would you circumvent that by talking about a different variable that is controllable, and seeing if that fully accounts for the difference? Or does the math work the same whether or not it can be translated into a natural-language description of a doable experiment? (But if thats the case, and P(lower grades | do(black=true)) is still meaningful, then what exactly does the do() notation imply?)
 
posted by Adam
 on September 22, 2009 #
 
I always take all these research findings with a bit of salt. I would love to read and understand the list of logical fallacies cognitive twists that clearly show nothing can be taken at face value as it appears to be.
 
One neat and brief presentation of logical fallacies: http://onegoodmove.org/fallacy/toc.htm
 
posted by Mohan Arun L 
 on September 23, 2009 #
 
Excellent post, but you should have titled it, Mud Causes Rain? The New Science of Causation.
 
posted by John Lam
 on September 24, 2009 #
 
there are some limited forms of statistical causality, such as granger causality or phase-slope indexing. there are also notions of temporal nesting & hierarchical processes which have some bounded or structural causation. examples of applications in neuroscience are nested gamma-band coherence with micro-saccades, hippocampal theta-nesting, and similar temporal structuring.
 
posted by chris lewis
 on October  2, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September 18, 2009
 
Title: Tim DeLaughter and the Boundary of Spectacle
 
The traditional symphony is a highly formal event. Musicians, in formal clothes, sit in a carefully-designed arrangement high above the audience who (also usually in formal clothes) sits in seats and applauds at formally-appropriate moments (recall the odd paradox of most of the audience unsure when to clap; is it the end of the piece or just the end of the movement?). The music performed is also often formal, classical music, like fine art generally, typically signifying something a cut above everyday life.
 
This is challenged somewhat by things like the Boston Pops, a symphony who, for the 4th of July, performed Sweet Caroline with Neil Diamond to a crowd of people sitting on towels on the lawn waving flags. But, even so, the main feeling was of people crowding around to see something spectacular  look, its Neil Diamond!
 
The sense was rather different when, wandering past techs and grips, Tim DeLaughter, wearing the dingiest of street clothes, climbed over a forest of cables to the microphone and begun talking about how his father used to beat him for imitating Neil Diamond. Look, its him! was thoroughly tempered with Who is this guy?
 
So, you know, I would say things like (Neil Diamond voice:) Please pass the potatoes! Im so very hungry! [pats his stomach] and hed say Dont you dare do that again and bitchslap me [mimes bitchslapping] and of course Id do it again and again.
 
And so the audience was throughly puzzled by the time he, rather casually, dropped in the line Let me bring out the band and the couple dozen members wandered out onto the stage, also in street clothes. But soon the lights faded and Tim grabbed the microphone and in a burst of light and music, they launched into a rousing version of Sweet Caroline.
 
Tim pranced on stage like no one youve ever seen and the audience bounced up and down and sung along with enthusiasm, but in a throughly confused manner. No one was quite sure how seriously to take a disheveled-looking bunch of dancers, violinists, trumpeters, and harpists led by a guy in street clothes prancing around doing his best imitation of Neil Diamond. (Although, God, nothing can top the chorus girls flicking their hair in tune with Live and Let Die.)
 
A rock band is a special kind of spectacle all on its own  think of Beatlesmania, for example, or how rock star is a generalized term for a special kind of awe-inspiring celebrity  and Tim did everything he could to both heighten this sense and demolish it. Theyd launch into furious imposing rock songs and the audience would scream and reach toward them, but then the rock would fade down into a quieter symphonic bridge section and Tim would sit down on the stage and chat casually with someone in the front row, while still playing the bridges main repeating theme on his guitar.
 
All the usual audience-musician relations were subverted. Musicians often point their mic at the crowd to inspire them to scream the key line in a chorus. Tim, in the middle of a verse, would bend down and point the microphone in a fans face and let them sing it. And while some musicians bodysurf on the crowds hands, while he sang about being under the ocean, Tim literally lay down on the beer-drenched sticky floor and crawled between their legs.
 
The tension was only heightened in the second act, when the band appeared in their famous white robes, but approached the stage by walking through the audience, saying hi to everyone and hugging like old friends. Tim frequently jumped down into the audience and hugged people in the middle of singing, the microphone in one hand reaching around their back to meet his face on the other side.
 
The fundamental tension of celebrity is appearing to the world as someone superhuman  achiever of great deeds, seen only in airbrushed photos and on giant screens, known by vastly more people than they themselves know  while still, at base, being a human like everyone else, the kind of person who goes down the street to get a sandwich and chats with people on the subway and all the other humdrum pieces of daily life. Its an odd contradiction and never have I seen it presented better than watching the Polyphonic Spree on stage last night.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 18, 2009
 
Some may not realize the full significance of a Neil Diamond rendition of Sweet Caroline in Massachusetts. This song is played (and lustily sung by the crowd) in the late innings of every Red Sox game in Fenway Park.
 
posted by Sam Pratt
 on September 18, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September 16, 2009
 
Title: On Finishing Infinite Jest
 
NOTE: For those who have actually read Infinite Jest, youll probably get more out of my very spoiler-heavy summary of what happens just after the end of the book.
 
I dont remember starting Infinite Jest. I dont even remember buying it. I remember seeing its bulk and oddly-entrancing cover in the basement of the seminary coop. But the price sticker on the back shows I bought it on sale at a Borders. I dont think Id read anything by DFW when I bought it. I cant remember why I would have. I very rarely read novels. Did someone recommend it? I cant imagine who. Maybe I just thought, I need something long to take on this trip.
 
I remember reading chapter 2 (Eredy Waits for Pot) the week I spent in Boston after I got back from Europe. So I must have taken it to Europe. So I probably bought it at the San Francisco Westfield Borders; that was the bookstore I shopped at back then.
 
Did I start it in Europe? Around page 750, I found a note I couldnt read in a hand I didnt recognize with a symbol I couldnt understand. But it was stamped with the address of our German hotel. Although I dont remember having a room in the hotel myself; I just remember sleeping in other peoples rooms. I must have had a room, though, right?
 
That week in Boston I tried to write a book. Then I got sick. I stopped leaving the apartment. I stopped eating. I went a bit bats, I suppose. But it was getting sick that start of it, some kind of bad cold or something. I remember that. It didnt leave me with much interest in swallowing food.
 
I remember taking the novel to the cafe on the corner. I remember the cafe being largely empty, huge lakes of golden light streaming in through the window, making everything glow. Time seemed to be slowed down, every moment made up of beautiful frames. And I read about Eredy waiting for pot.
 
My apartment at the time was a dingy place. My roommates and I had moved to San Francisco and the place was left empty except for the collecting dust. It was a big place, held three people before we left, and I had it to myself, to go mad in.
 
I next remember reading it in my new place in San Francisco, which I got later that year. I remember thinking it didnt make much sense and had only a handful of good parts. I dusted it off again at my new place in Boston for Infinite Summer, starting from where I left off. But around page 500, I realized it wasnt a bunch of isolated stories like Id assumed. As the Aventura kicked shit into the Antitois door I realized Id been missing the point. On a trip to DC, I flipped back to check a detail and was shocked to find whole swathes of things I didnt even recognize, whole chapters Id not only forgotten but showed no signs of ever having read, rereading them didnt jog a single memory.
 
The whole book is laced through with mocking cracks at this disconnected style, like a preemptive apology. And the ending really doesnt help matters. But in the middle it is truly grand, some of the best fiction ever. I just hope that Ill remember it.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 16, 2009
 
I read Infinite Jest over a period of nine months on someones recommendation, and when I was done I couldnt remember who recommended it and couldnt decide if I wanted to punch them or thank them.
 
posted by Ry4an
 on September 17, 2009 #
 
I enjoy your posts. They are very.. intriguing, in an almost funny way. (Thats my attempt at complimenting..
 
Anyways, I was just going to suggest that you write a review on the book. That is one way you wont forget this great work of fiction.
 
Just a thought.
 
Cheers.
 
Mystic.
 
posted by Mystic
 on September 17, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September 15, 2009
 
Title: Honest Theft
 
Yesterday I mentioned the case of my friends who save money by living at MIT. They sleep on couches in the common rooms, break into the showers in the gym, and steal food and drink from the cafeterias. They use the money they save on necessities to promote the public good. I suggested that theyre actually behaving more morally than the average citizen. This seems shocking, so lets look at the objections in depth.
 
Theres the obvious argument that by taking these things without paying, theyre actually passing on their costs to the rest of the MIT community. But for most of these things, there are no costs: no MIT students use the couches or the showers at night. And while its true that taking MIT food and drink probably does increase the universitys costs slightly, this concern doesnt seem too consistently applied. Do you think its wrong to take one of the free refreshments at an MIT event? The consequences seem about the same.
 
Even if they were costing MIT money, it seems this could be justified. MIT receives enormous sums from the wealthy and powerful, more than they know how to spend. Much of it gets spent on unneeded luxuries for their already-elite students. Redistributing it to the towns poorer residents seems potentially justified.
 
Others claim that this lifestyle results in increased security costs. I dont see how thats true unless the students get caught. Even if they did, MIT has a notoriously relaxed security policy, so they likely wouldnt get in too much trouble and MIT probably wouldnt do anything to up their security.
 
A more serious complaint is that this erodes the social contact. Peter Singer (no contract theorist he!) puts this more clearly in his book Democracy and Disobedience: In any society people are going to have disputes. Everyones better off if these disputes are resolved without resorting to force. Thus in most societies there are governments to help resolve disputes peacefully. Resorting to force when you dont like their resolution could tip things back to the bad state of people resolving things through force in general.
 
I dont think this is a particularly plausible concern. My friends (understandably) keep quiet about their lifestyle. If anyone, I am the one undermining the social contract by publicizing it. But lets keep me out of this analysis for a second. Its hard to see how sleeping on MIT couches will lead to violent revolution.1
 
Its possible there are other objections to this style of life. Or perhaps some objectors are right  and not only shouldnt we steal from MIT, but we shouldnt take advantage of their largesse either. But thinking about these questions  as opposed to blindly following rules  is what it means to be a moral person and instead of eroding the social contract it seems much more likely to strengthen our moral sense.
 
Singer identifies one other concern, particular to democracies. (He thinks the previous concern is especially relevant in democracies, since theres not much improvement revolution can lead to, but in the end he decides this isnt too relevant since modern democracies arent actually democratic.) He suggests that its wrong to participate in politics and vote like everybody else, but then refuse to follow the rules when the decision ends up being something you dont like.
 
I think this is a fairly silly objection and basically impossible to justify on utilitarian grounds. (The book is Singers doctoral thesis and is weirdly agnostic on utilitarianism. Its also not particularly well-written, so my apologies if Im missing part of Singers argument.)
 
Imagine its a presidential election year and the major issue is that candidate A has promised to make kids in public schools wear uniforms while candidate B opposes it. (Imagine also that the president has the power to accomplish this rule change by simple executive order.) Whatever happens, you refuse to send your child to school wearing a uniform  you plan to keep dressing them as you do now. You have two choices: vote for candidate B or not cast a vote for president.
 
Singer suggests that if you vote for B and A wins, you ought to make your child wear the uniform. Its hard to see how this helps anyone. Nobody knows whether you voted for president or not (its a secret ballot), no good (as far as I can see) comes from not voting. Indeed, if you vote for B, you make it more likely that everyone avoids this unjust law and you make it more likely you wont have to resort to civil disobedience and erode the social fabric.
 
Its hard to see how any intuitive notion of obligation can trump this.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 15, 2009
 
But what if everybody acted as your friends did?  Maybe a few guys stealing some leftovers is no big deal, but what if the entire population of Cambridge showed up searching for a free meal?
 
I always kind of liked Kants idea on ethics:  act in the way you wish everybody did.
 
posted by steve minutillo
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
Sounds an awful lot like the end justifies the means. When does it become not okay? The fact that you are working to justify says something.
 
I would also guess a lot depends on the passibilty of the perpetrators. Not only do they get away with this because they can pass well at MIT, but I wonder if outrage is missing because these folks could otherwise pass.
 
Put a less well off & shabby person in this situation, and the how would the reactions be different?
 
posted by KiltBear
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
Well, that certainly goes over the second order effects. Im inclined to agree with you in this case, I never really meant to disagree (having none of the details) just to make a point about the possible counter balancing utilities.
 
A couple nits:
 
When you write, Its hard to see how sleeping on MIT couches will lead to violent revolution I cant help but think Its hard to see how driving to work can cause global warming.
 
In response to your footnote, I dont believe Singer would agree that by not voting in the election you have earned the moral right to defy the executive order. By living in a democratic society at all youre probably participating in it and benefiting from it.
 
If you were a true vagrant who didnt pay taxes, vote, etc. you might be free of such obligations to obey the law, but similarly the society which surrounds you has no special obligation to you as they would to citizens.
 
posted by Alex
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
Dont buy it, Aaron.  Honest theft is an oxymoron.  Your pals taking advantage of MIT are thieves.  Their choices are not exempt because of their defense that they convert their theft into public good (your defense of them is void of economically valid analysis of their value added to society in exchange for their theft of services.  Where is the analysis?).  Surely, public safety and ethics would argue that the paying client is entitled to a free-loader free shower and sofa snooze, whenever he or she desires it.  Not to mention that the intrusion of free-loaders into the society also provides for the entrance of lawlessness and disorder, leading to chaos, leading to criminality and dangers to public safety.
 
Id think more highly of your vaunted examples had they organized as a legitimate non-profit and managed to pay for their own living expenses.  There is no quid pro quo.  No one owes them a place to live.
 
As a person who gives a great deal of my own money and time to non-profit causes, yet pays my own way in life, I object to the premise of your argument and find it specious, at best.
 
posted by ixnay
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
Do you have a couch and a shower? Do you sometimes leave the house? Then why not let other people use the couch and the shower while you are away? You might even be reimbursed for the costs for water and heating - it would be cheaper for the city than providing real shelter for the homeless.
 
posted by Bjoern
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
Your argument might work while it is only a few people behaving this way. The problem is that it never stays that way. Today your friends make use of the MIT facilities this way, and they rationalize it by saying that they are using the money they save to help someone else. Tomorrow, some less ethical person will come along and do the same thing, with the exception that he/she will not pass on the cost benefits to the lesser priveleged. And that person would rationalize it saying that these guys were doing it before I did and no one said anything to them. No one ever goes into a full analysis of another persons actions before deciding to imitate them - which is why the followers of any religion, any social leader end up doing lip service by following what they see rather than trying to achieve the intended result.
 
This is the old means vs. ends argument. It does not matter how honest, how sincere the expected ends are, the means do matter, since that is what is observed. If you
 
posted by Divya
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
Like the others in the comment thread, I find your logic puzzling.  Where do you draw the line?  Does the end justify the means?  There seems to be a level of self importance that borders on scary and is at the very least disillusioned.   One hates to pass judgement on those you dont know, but in this particular case, the justification of the behavior seems to warrant some judgement.
 
There are other options, and obviously these people are resourceful, and will likely be able to identify those options.
 
posted by Deepak
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
I have to comment again. Isnt the crux of your argument this: Much of it gets spent on unneeded luxuries for their already-elite students. Redistributing it to the towns poorer residents seems potentially justified.
 
So it is just the plain old hating of the rich again (rich people are thieves, so stealing from them is not stealing)? That is a particular judgment you pass on the rich, but how can you elevate that to a universal judgment??
 
The argument for free refreshments at MIT events also doesnt hold up. MIT likely stages these events for a purpose, for example to attract good students or new sponsors, so they receive something in return for the free refreshments. I would indeed consider sneaking into events where I wasnt invited and eating there to be stealing.
 
Also what if because of your friends actions, the elitist students stay away from MIT, or the atmosphere of openness is lost, because people feel they cant trust their environment anymore? This could damage the research - one of these students might have discovered a cure for HIV saving millions of lives, but now it wont never happen. Because MIT is not attractive anymore, that person perhaps decides to just stay at home on his moms couch and watch TV. Or go to a bad college instead where he doesnt meet the right people and ideas.
 
As another comment pointed out: how big are the savings from stealing into MIT, compared to the cost to society? I am not sure that the benefit outweighs the cost.
 
In any case, dont presume you are arguing universal values here. If some people think it is OK to steal, let them do it - but dont complain if the people being stolen from shoot back.
 
If your friends are so concerned about the waste going on at MIT, why dont they apply to MIT the official way. Once their they could probably start a student union with the aim to redistribute some of the wealth to the poor.
 
posted by Bjoern
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
These are MIT students, right? The article implies they are by their behaviour. The comments suggest they are skateboarders, slackers, unemployed and homeless.
 
Im assuming these are MIT students and were straining to use the word theft which entered into the discussion because we needed a topic.
 
When I went to University I stole a lot from the university, despite having my own place and government grants. You work late, you sleep on the couch; you scrounge food; you go to art shows for the free beer (and free art!).
 
posted by brad
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
brad, see the previous post: I have friends who, to save money, break into buildings on the MIT campus to steal food and drink and naps and showers. The folks mentioned arent MIT students.
 
Aaron, this is the ends justify the means with a dash of Robin Hood thrown in. Both are crap arguments because the end can justify any means and despite the romance of Robin Hood, he was still a criminal. Why dont your friends just up and ante and steal from banks? Or mug rich people in the streets to help the public good?
 
I find it very interesting that so many people who say they want to help others, do so by putting themselves above the system that supports them.
 
posted by DDA
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
Ouch, guess you wont find much support for your viewpoint in the comments. I like these ethical posts and the resulting discussion, though, so keep it up.
 
posted by Alex
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
Isnt the ends justify the means the same argument the Bush administration gave for using torture  sorry, I mean enhanced interrogation techniques?
 
posted by ged
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
One could argue that its less about the immediate effects than about how you would skew the perception that people have of a normal, moral or whatever behaviour. Even if you think you can trust everyone in your community or country to be wise in their trespassing right now, everyone will have its own definition of what just is, and since the law is optional well you know what happens next, a big mess of conflicts where everyone justifies its actions with the past wrongdoings. In brief your model will slide easily into chaos. The interesting thing about law is that it provides stability, prevents drastic shifts (of course you can still provoke them if your a skilled one, see FUD).
 
I think that even if I can side with some civil desobedience actions, I wouldnt argue its lawful or innately just to use this way of fighting. More like a last resort because you cant agree with the society, democratic or not, as they trespass on values you cant reliquish no matter what.
 
posted by Hmmmm
 on September 16, 2009 #
 
Aaron, this is the ends justify the means with a dash of Robin Hood thrown in.
 
Im very curious about this claim that the ends dont justify the
means. What does it mean? The naive reading is that we should never do something bad to accomplish something good, but surely you dont really believe that. (If you were hiding a Jew and the Nazis came to your house and asked if you had any Jews there, would you tell the truth? After all, lying is bad and the ends dont justify the means.) So I hope you can tell me what you mean.
 
I think there are practical problems with robbing banks and mugging people in the street, but I dont think wealth redistribution is morally wrong. Nor do most people, I think  after all, thats why we have progressive taxation with a negative income tax.
 
These are MIT students, right?
 
I believe theyre MIT dropouts. I.e., they once were students but not anymore.
 
Do you have a couch and a shower? Do you sometimes leave the house? Then why not let other people use the couch and the shower while you are away?
 
Thats a good idea. If there was a good way to do that, I would consider participating.
 
I dont hate the rich; I think everyone would be better off if they had less money and the poor and more. And even if Im wrong about everyone being better off, it seems pretty clear that more people would be better off that way.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on September 16, 2009 #
 
If its the Nazis you wont feel any obligation to respect the state they represent right ? So, you dont recognize the state and disobey accordingly. Now if not lying is ingrained into your brain like a robotic law, then youll have to reject nazis as a class that doesnt deserve some particular rights, which sounds interestingly bad.
 
posted by Hmmmm
 on September 16, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September 14, 2009
 
Title: A Short Course in Ethics
 
How are we to live? Most people seem to agree that there are right things and wrong things and we should try to do the right ones, but theyre less clear on how to figure out what the right ones are.
 
Some say there are certain moral rules (dont murder, dont steal) that we must follow to be right. But how do you decide what those rules are? Many such rules have been proposed; how do we pick the good ones?
 
If you ask someone to justify a rule, they usually do it by listing its consequences: if we dont steal, God will reward us; everyone will be happier if we stop killing. In the end, it seems like everything boils down to consequences: good acts are those which accomplish good things.
 
So how do we decide what good things are? Doesnt everyone have their own idea of whats good? Instead of trying to promote one particular persons notion of whats good, it seems like we should balance everyones good. In most cases, its impossible for us to know whats actually good for a person, so this usually means taking their word for it and trying to give them what they want.
 
(Cases where people dont seem to want whats good for them are usually cases where people are confused about what they want. I may think I really want to eat this whole box of cookies but later Ill realize I really wish I hadnt.)
 
But everyone wants different things  how do we balance their desires? It seems like the only fair thing to do is to treat everyone equally. Of course, this doesnt mean treating every want equally: if one person wants a yacht and another person wants a dry place to sleep tonight, the second want seems much stronger than the first; filling it will accomplish more overall good.
 
Heres another way to look at this. Imagine that before we were born, we all sat up in the heavens and talked about how to design the world. None of us yet know which bodies we would be born into or which parents wed have, so none of us can possibly be biased. Arent we all going to want to promote the greatest good overall? Well make sure the worst-off arent particularly worse-off in case were one of them, and well make sure the rest arent especially handicapped in case were one of them.1 If we have to choose between a world with one more yacht for Larry Ellison and one with one more dry place to sleep for a woman in poverty, well probably pick the dry place.
 
So we have our simple moral principle: when faced with a question, pick the answer that will accomplish the most overall good. Two friends both want to borrow my TV tonight, but one already has a TV and just wants it so he can watch two channels at once, while the other cant afford even a single television. Our principle suggests the TV goes to the second.
 
But our principle doesnt just apply to the questions were obviously faced with. Surely there are many other people who want a TV and have even less than my friend. By our logic, they would seem to deserve the TV even more, even though they didnt happen to be asking me for it and thus forcing me to confront the question.
 
It seems like we need to think more carefully about the implicit question of each moment: what do I do now  with my time, my money, my possessions? And it seems like we need to apply the same moral rule.
 
The conclusion is inescapable: we must live our lives to promote the most overall good. And that would seem to mean helping those most in want  the worlds poorest people.
 
Our rule demands one do everything they can to help the poorest  not just spending ones wealth and selling ones possessions, but breaking the law if that will help. I have friends who, to save money, break into buildings on the MIT campus to steal food and drink and naps and showers. They use the money they save to promote the public good. It seems like these criminals, not the average workaday law-abiding citizen, should be our moral exemplars.
 
Such a thorough-going conception of ethics seems incredibly difficult. Surely it requires severe changes in our life. The traditional notion of ethics is much easier  there are some bad things (stealing, lying, cheating) and we need to try our best not to do them. But, as in any field, its important to separate the truth from whats convenient. People are often criticized for not doing what they think is right (hypocrisy), but not believing in whats right because its hard to do is far worse!
 
I am convinced that the account here is largely correct, but I certainly dont live up to its demanding standards. And thats OK. One of the conclusions of this argument is that its impossible to be perfectly moral. By accepting that, and keeping it in the back of my mind, I do a little better each day.
 
For a long time, people told me eating meat was wrong and I refused to believe them, because I thought it would be impossible for me not to eat meat. Then one day, I accepted that they were right and I was doing the wrong thing and I decided I could live with that. I wasnt perfect. But shortly after I decided that, meat started seeming less and less attractive, and I started eating less and less, and now I dont eat it at all anymore.
 
Accepting youre immoral is the first step to being a more moral person.
 
This thought experiment comes from philosopher John Rawls, although its conclusion has been modified by Peter Singer.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 14, 2009
 
I agree with your premise that to be morally good you should be working for the world that you would want before you knew which life you would lead.
 
I just want to point out that a good utilitarian needs to be very careful in the judgment of which actions are good and bad, because there are often second and third order consequences to out actions we dont immediately consider.
 
Your friends that break into MIT, for example, erode away the rule of law and so in some way erode the social contract that keeps this society running. They also steal a fractional bit of money from each person that exists in the MIT ecosystem. Im not trying to say that isnt worth it, perhaps it is, but it needs to be considered.
 
Similarly at least some forms of aid to the poor seem to do more harm than good once you consider second order effects. I wont say all do, thats just a little too convenient, but you see what Im saying.
 
posted by Alex
 on September 14, 2009 #
 
Perhaps those friends of yours should instead create some value, exchange it for money, and use that money the make to help those in need, instead of damaging property, stealing goods, and probably causing spending on security services to be raised, all a net-loss.  Each takes time.  One is clearly better for everybody.
 
posted by Chris Thiessen
 on September 14, 2009 #
 
There are two problems with that famous thought experiment:
1) You cant get there from here. An appeal to an original position or any other objective ideal is unlikely to accomplish much, since there never has nor will be a time we can dispassionately discuss justice. We are always here in the middle of the struggle.
2) We all have dog in the fight. Another thought experiment that tries to divide a chocolate cake to maximize justice shows there is no objective way to chose between the baker, the chocolate lover, the hungriest, etc.
 
Amartya Sens new book, The Idea of Justice, takes a different approach: addressing injustice instead of searching for the ideal just society. Very interesting. Im reading it now.
 
posted by Warren Yoder
 on September 14, 2009 #
 
When I was up in the heavens, I looked at a study saying that overall wealth is increased when property rights are respected, and decided that was the greater good I wanted for the world.
 
posted by Joe
 on September 14, 2009 #
 
Every time you commit a crime theres a risk you could get caught, which could be really bad.  Although I certainly accept that committing a crime could be the right thing to do.  Im in favor of illegally ripping CDs you checked out from the library, for instance.
 
Are any of your friends trying to acquire wealth and power by more traditional means so they can turn around and do good with it?
 
posted by John Maxwell IV
 on September 14, 2009 #
 
Unfortunately or fortunately there is a system that tried to bring equality to the world and it has failed miserably due to a fact that it took for granted since it started. This system tried to take from the rich to give to the poor, and thought maybe the poor wouldnt be as poor with what the other fortunate people had. It forgot one thing that is what keeps this system going, it forgot the human need to own something, anything, or everything. From personal experience when you take away the goal of maybe one day I will at least own something, you take away the hope to live, we are greedy by nature, and communism has been trying to eradicate that desire since 1905 and still fails miserably. What you are suggesting we do or how we should act is been tried already, its nothing new and its still an impossible goal to reach. The needs of the many does always outweigh the needs of the few, its very true but because we are trapped in our miserable human nature its impossible to achieve. Mark Twain explains it better in Letters from earth.
 
posted by Levi
 on September 14, 2009 #
 
I have replied on Hacker News, see link below
 
http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=822985
 
posted by Tichy
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
Need is no valid claim upon the life or property of another person. If two of your friends request to borrow your television, youd certainly consider which friend you like more along with how much he wants the television. Who the television goes to is not dictated by petty need. You cant really love everybody.
 
Morality comes from the basic choice to live or to die. If youre reading this youve almost certainly chosen to pursue living. As a human you must decide which decisions coincide with your decision to live by rationality and reason. By deciding that you have the right to live, you also decide that you have the right to the things you need to live, your property and freedom. Further, to be moral you need to decide what is of value to you and what helps your own life. A rational man will thus do his best to produce the best product or service in order to receive fair compensation. He serves his OWN self. He doesnt take handouts, he doesnt give away things he desires to people he knows nothing about.
 
Altruism / Sacrifice are about destroying that which is good about yourself, your property, or your life so that something less good can profit. In other words, altruism is giving people less noble gifts they havent earned. Its redistribution of wealth from the good to the evil. Communism isnt impractical, its immoral.
 
posted by Lance Boyer
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
None of us yet know which bodies we would be born into or which parents wed have, so none of us can possibly be biased. Arent we all going to want to promote the greatest good overall?
 
Well, thats the idea of the parable, but, in a way, its ultimately rather trivial.
 
1) Its a logically self-consistent answer to say No - I want a system with a few winners and everyone else loses, because I will be one of the winners. This is not abstract - many people in your social circle make their living by peddling exactly this idea.
 
2) There are many intellectual servants of the ultra-rich who have as their jobs trying to convince everyone that the greatest good is produced by a social system with ultra-rich (examples too numerous to mention).
 
So, it doesnt go far.
 
posted by Verisign DBMS
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September  8, 2009
 
Title: Why I Am Not Gay
 
Until recently, men having sex with men was disapproved of in American culture. Actually, disapproved of isnt really the right word  it was immoral, illegal, disgusting. People who did it lived in secrecy, under the constant threat of blackmail for their actions.
 
In the tumult of the 1960s, various out-groups  blacks, Chicanos, Native Americans  begun organizing themselves and demanding to be respected and given their due. And men-who-had-sex-with-men decided that they were an out-group  they were gay  and they deserved rights too.
 
In doing so, they transformed an action (having relationships with someone of the same gender) into an identity (being gay). And, using the normal human mechanisms for distinguishing between people in your club and those not in it, they closed ranks. Gay men didnt have sex with women. Those who did werent gay, they were bi (which became a whole new identity in itself)  or probably just lying to themselves. And straight men had to be on constant guard against being attracted to other men  if they were, it meant that deep down, they were actually gay.
 
This new gay identity was projected back through history  famous historical figures were outed as gay, because theyd once taken lovers of their own gender. They truly were gay underneath, it was said  it was just a homophobic society that forced them to appear to like the opposite sex.
 
Along with the identity went an attempt at justification. Being gay wasnt a choice, they argued  it was innate. Some people were just born gay and others werent. To a culture that tried to correct gay people into being straight, they insisted that correction was impossible  they just werent wired this way. (They even provided a ridiculous genetic explanation for how a species with a small percentage gay people might evolve.)
 
This might have been a good thing to say  maybe even necessary in such a homophobic culture  but in the end it has to be seen as simply wrong. Having sex with other people of your gender isnt an identity, its an act. And, like sex in general among consenting adults, people should be able to do it if they want to. Having sex with someone shouldnt require an identity crisis. (Nobody sees having-sex-with-white-people as part of their identity, even if thats primarily who theyre attracted to.)
 
People shouldnt be forced to categorize themselves as gay, straight, or bi. People are just people. Maybe youre mostly attracted to men. Maybe youre mostly attracted to women. Maybe youre attracted to everyone. These are historical claims  not future predictions. If we truly want to expand the scope of human freedom, we should encourage people to date who they want; not just provide more categorical boxes for them to slot themselves into. A man who has mostly dated men should be just as welcome to date women as a woman whos mostly dated men.
 
So thats why Im not gay. I hook up with people. I enjoy it. Sometimes theyre men, sometimes theyre women. I dont see why it needs to be any more complicated than that.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September  8, 2009
 
I think youre mischaracterizing what happened to say that out groups created their own identities, and it borders on blaming the victim. The concept of gay existed long before gay rights groups. It must have because the discrimination that lead to the formation of such groups relied on such an identity. It was not, as you suggest, merely an action that was (is) discriminated against; it was an identity associated with that action.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
For you it is an act, for some it is very much an identity.  Particularly those who choose to settle down and get married with a member of the opposite sex.
 
I appreciate your sentiment, but for some people it is very important to give themselves a label, if only to show the world that the label is perfectly acceptable and not scary.  And it isnt.
 
posted by Steven Chabot
 on September  9, 2009 #
 
Isnt one source of the action having sex with someone an identity, i.e. some facts about you which arent up to you? People at least partly discover their own selves, they dont create them purely by choice. Who one has sex with - and who one likes, is attracted to, loves, wants to spend time with, etc. - is grounded in, and helps make, important discoveries about oneself. So, to answer your question about why it needs to be more complicated than that: because it is more complicated than that. Were not the self-creating creatures you imply. (None of this is at all to suggest that theres anything wrong with having sex with people of your own gender, or with being gay. There isnt, and homophobes can fuck off.)
 
posted by Sam C
 on September  9, 2009 #
 
I wonder if were using identity to mean different things. Lets make a distinction (Im a philosopher, I make distinctions compulsively): identity(1) is a way in which people are labelled and pigeonholed  soccer mom, goth, juvenile delinquent; identity(2) is a deep unchosen fact about oneself  Id say that sexuality is one such, but even if not, there are such (I like humors as rough guides here: some people just are melancholic). Youre right that having-sex-with-white-people isnt currently an identity(1) for me or you, although it could become one, and maybe even is one: one name for it would be race traitor. Im inclined to think it isnt even a possible identity(2) for creatures like us, given how fascinating, including sexually fascinating, humans seem to find difference. Identities(1) and (2) can fail to match: I can be misperceived by others, and damaged by that misperception. And in general  I think  its better for us to have identities(1) and (2) which do match  to be seen as we are. Thats why its valuable that there is a recognised, non-hateful identity(1) gay to match some peoples gay identity(2). That doesnt stop there being people for whom sexuality isnt a part of identity(2)  who enjoy having sex with people of both sexes, but dont feel that anything deep in themselves is engaged when they do. I think theyre unusual people, to be honest; I know Im not one of them.
 
posted by Sam C
 on September  9, 2009 #
 
Sams right that having-sex-with-white-people very much was an identity. And just like gay, that identity was forced on a group of people by another as a means of disapproving of the people, not just their actions. In both cases, you can now afford to bypass the identity precisely because others before you have worked so hard to remove the power it once held. That you not only fail to value that work, but even blame it for creating the divisive identity it actually destroyed is  frustrating  sad  I dont even know.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on September  9, 2009 #
 
Steven Chabot says, For some it is very much an identity. Particularly those who choose to settle down and get married with a member of the opposite sex.
 
As someone who is married to a member of the opposite sex, I challenge the connection you are drawing here. Although Ive never hooked up with people  sex is too personal to me for that  I see my sexual history very much as Aaron sees his: historical claims, not future predictions. My identity has many facets, but none of those facets includes a category such as heterosexual  even though, as it happens, all of the small number of people Ive had sex with are female, and given that Im in a monogamous permanent marriage, that seems likely to remain true for many more years.
 
I do think that Aarons just-so story is historically incorrect in the following sense: the concept of a homosexual predates the gay rights movement by quite a bit. Although the first edition of the OED doesnt list it (the H volume came out in 1901), according to Wikipedia, it was listed as a disorder in the very influential Psychopathia Sexualis in 1886.
 
posted by Kragen Javier Sitaker
 on September  9, 2009 #
 
At least you have some idea where youre at on the Kinsey scale, no?
 
posted by Mike
 on September  9, 2009 #
 
I like your argument but I dont think sexual identity can be written off until all are liberated. Its easy to argue against identity politics, but people coming together under various labels is useful as an interim measure. I enjoy queer but use gay as well to be more specific, since Im nearly always attracted to men and am familiar with its cultural implications.
 
posted by backspace
 on September  9, 2009 #
 
Huh, thats (almost) exactly what I always say about sexual orientation/identity. The one thing Im not sure about is if its completely correct to say These are historical claims  not future predictions. I think in most cases it is both. From a probabilistic perspective, if 100% of the people youve previously been attracted to (or hooked up with, or fallen in love with, etc.) have been, say, men, and the sample size is large enough, then that is strong evidence, given that you are attracted to somebody, that they are male; and the converse, given that someone is male, stronger evidence that you will be attracted to them than it would be if they were female.
 
Still, things can change, and people shouldnt need to identify with probabilities. (I think the youre born with your sexual orientation and it never changes meme has outlived both its usefulness and any evidence for it.) I tend to be more attracted to women than to men; but I cant call myself bisexual or heterosexual (which both sound too exact), so if I must call myself anything, I use a word coined by a friend of mine who feels similarly: wtfsexual. Were not trying to seriously promote it as a new word, but it does tend to make people curious to understand it. It is essentially what you said at the end: I hook up with people. I enjoy it. Sometimes theyre men, sometimes theyre women. I dont see why it needs to be any more complicated than that. I usually state it as: I am attracted to whomever Im attracted to. There may or may not be clear patterns in my sexual attraction, but so what? This way, if I end up (for instance) being more attracted to menat some point, then I can skip the identity crisis and get on with my life.
 
I do think, as a practical matter, that the gay identity and gay rights movement will still be necessary for some time to come. Maybe someday the idea of sexual orientation/identity will become unnecessary and fade away, but if it suddenly vanished today, people would still hate men who have sex with men, and women who have sex with women, even without that identity. And having a shared identity is a fairly important aspect (or perhaps a natural consequence) of having a cultural movement against those attitudes.
 
posted by Adam
 on September  9, 2009 #
 
Ow ow ow  where to begin untangling this  lets start with identity politics.
 
1) Identity politics is somewhat arbitrary - true. However, it is fallacious to then conclude all social relationships are utterly arbitrary (lots people make this mistake) - I dont see why it needs to be any more complicated than that.
 
2) Homophobia - you have a really garbled tale here, which pretty clearly comes from seeing current intellectualizing, and not where it came from (In doing so, they transformed an action (having relationships with someone of the same gender) into an identity  - you have this very much reversed in terms of history.
 
Im going to leave it at that for the moment.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on September 10, 2009 #
 
Until recently, men having sex with men was disapproved of in American culture. Actually, disapproved of isnt really the right word  it was immoral, illegal, disgusting. People who did it lived in secrecy, under the constant threat of blackmail for their actions.
 
Not true. You really have not done your research and I think based on your interest in the subject that you should. Here are two great books off the top of my head that talk about this specifically in a historical context as well as other things:
 
Chauncey, George - Gay New York: Gender, Urban Culture, and the Making of the Gay Male World, 1890-1940
 
Michel Foucault - History of Sexuality
 
posted by non
 on September 10, 2009 #
 
You are being from the future. A very good future. A future I hope is more now as a result of people saying things like this.
 
Mike: my problem with the Kinsey scale is that its so static. I know Ive slid around it in my life, and hell, I think its moved on some long days. That said, I really do appreciate that it was an incredibly powerful way of looking at things for its time.
 
We arent attracted to men, or women, categorically. If we are thats a whole nother level of mental illness. We are attracted to people, individuals who may have consistent features. Makes us laugh. Brunette. Dimples. A set of genitalia is just another feature.
 
posted by q
 on September 10, 2009 #
 
The Kinsey scale is valid. Its fine that youre not gay. Nothing wrong with being a man who has sex with men (and women). However, just because you are a 2 or 3 or 4 on the Kinsey scale, does not mean that 1s or 5s dont exist. Some people really are gay or straight  or to take away the identity, which you are correct to minimize, some people are exclusively sexually and emotionally attracted to people of the same sex, and some only like the opposite.
 
posted by Kevin
 on September 10, 2009 #
 
It only needs to be more complicated than that when one is isolated and unoccupied.  Homophobias root:  storytelling.
 
posted by Pablo
 on September 10, 2009 #
 
God bless you Aaron, but this sounds exactly like the drivel from immature young men who dont understand the history or the struggle that many of us go through on the path to accepting ourselves, much less having anyone else accept us (or try to hurt us, as it was where I grew up). Without any research, or facts, I hear this kind of prattle from young entitled omni-sexuals who think that these identities as shackles when they have no concept of their history or how hard those before them struggled to make it ok for you to hook up with any gender and be ok with it and not be lynched.
 
Maybe this is my midwestern sensibilities  I did not grow up in a more accepting area of the United States, and had a massive struggle with defining my identity to myself, knowing that I was damning myself to potential isolation and harm from those in my community. One of the major reasons I moved far away to college, and eventually New York was so that I could freely embrace my identity as a gay man without fear of repercussion. However, until all sides see that gay, lesbian, straight, bi, anything is the same as being color blind when it comes to race, coming to grips with your identity was and remains a path to personal growth for certain people that cannot be abolished lest we leave some of our brethren behind to drown in the deep end with no support.
 
Conversations like these are more meant to express to your friends your desire to justify your particular lifestyle  they should not be raised as an argument to discount a movement and an identity that defines and enhances a generation. If you wanted to postulate this as a serious argument, then I would expect a guy as smart as you to do a little more research instead of making sweeping statements with no factual basis.
 
The simple fact is, as someone who is proud of my identity, I get so tired of hearing this same story repeated to me by the same people: Dont label me, labels are wrong, there should never be any labels, etc. This may be fine for you and your ilk, but if you refuse to acknowledge why those labels exist and why OTHERS may need them, then you are being as closed minded as the people you claim are labeling you.
 
I am a 28 year old, computer programming, music theatre loving, cranium playing, gay male who is an all around awesome guy that is so proud of how I had to struggle and how those struggled before to make it OK for me to say that. Dont dilute my identity because you dont agree that it may apply to you
 
posted by mb
 on September 10, 2009 #
 
mb,
You didnt mention your race and nationality. Shouldnt those be important parts of your identity too?
 
It seems to me there are are too many variables involved in creating a coherent and universal identity. I dont even really know what gay male means. In the same way, I dont know what black male means. Or white male. Or American. Theyre empty terms that seem to put limits rather than remove them. Several times, Ive used language to describe myself in detail. Even after 200 pages of self-reflection, I couldnt do it justice.
 
One thing I do know is I enjoy connecting with other people on an emotional level.
 
posted by fairykarma
 on September 10, 2009 #
 
Im by no means a prude on this  in fact, the hook up is one of the great joys of life.  But your focus on hooking up ultimately leads to unhappiness.  It is the curse of gay men / promiscuous anyone  the relative difficulty in structuring the long term monogamous relationship that seems to induce the most happiness in the most people.
 
Not all people are happiest with monogamy; but most people  gay and/or straight  are.
 
I do wonder how happy YOU are with this hey, thats cool man lifestyle you have.  If you are truly happy then I envy you.  I really do.  But I wonder
 
(Finally, I want to emphasize that as I say the above puritanical sounding statements I am by no means a moralist or a puritan.  In fact, Im amoral  I just believe in creating maximum happiness even at the expense of morality.)
 
posted by 
 on September 11, 2009 #
 
I think people like to be part of a group, to have other like-minded people around. Of course there is some prejudice here and there, but we are not made of glass, are we?
 
posted by Romulo
 on September 11, 2009 #
 
Ive always been uncomfortable with identifying as gay, more, I think because Im uncomfortable with the unspoken man part at the end of that sentence. Not because Im particularly effeminate, but because of all the crap thats tied up in being a man: not talking about your feelings, being introverted, misogyny (even for gay men), and so forth. That doesnt really suit me. I think the biggest advancement in queer/gay stuff in the last twenty years is the understanding that you cant really talk about gender without talking about sexuality stuff and vice versa. Theres also this paradox about coming out, where although we couch it in terms of becoming free and what not, being out is totally not freeing, because you say Im this, which always implies a bunch of things that youre not.
 
At the same I mostly have sex with male/menfolk, but I totally agree that its as much about habit and history as it is about some transcendent notion of desire. So despite hating gay as an identity and disliking being out, I really delight in the company of the queer communitysuch as it is.
 
My real gripe with gay and bi, is that it splits hairs, and it means that people who do the homo thing 40% of the time get shunted into another category from the people who do the homo thing 80% of the time, when really such things are largely irrelevant.
 
Ah details. Having said that, I do quite enjoy finding queerfolk in non-queer settings. I came to technology geek/hacker culture via a round about course, having spent a lot of time being a social science/queer/feminisms geek, and finding the places where queers+hackers mash up is always a good thing.
 
posted by tychoish
 on September 13, 2009 #
 
I think this is easy to say for someone who just sees sexuality as hooking up with people. Its this same kind of person who thinks that marriage is also an artificial construct and that its more natural to have open relationships. Im not really judging you, but I dont think you can apply the same opinion for labeling yourself to everybody who identifies themselves as a gay person.
 
To me being gay is one facet of my identity, but its as much a part of who I am it is for someone whos black. It affects a lot of things in my life. Besides just affecting how I actually physically have sex and the chunk of the population that would be my potential partners, personally I think I think differently than a heterosexual person (in the same way that men think they think differently from women, except I think I think differently from both straight men and straight women) and because Im gay when I have sex I dont dont have babies which means I would have to consider adoption or surrogacy or to not have a kid at all.
 
Im engaged to my boyfriend of 5+ years and because were gay a lot of aspects of our engagement/wedding will be different (besides the fact that we have to deal with legal issues at the moment). And I think just being two males also affects the balance of our relationship differently than it does for a male/female couple. Even the expectations men and women have for frequency of sex and frequency of orgasm affect that couples relationship as a whole in the long-term.
 
Theres just so many factors that make someone whos gay and in a relationship different from a straight person that gay as an identity is perfectly acceptable for me. And I think thats perfectly fine. Perhaps someone like you shouldnt choose to have gay or bi or anything as an identity because it doesnt define as much of who you are as a person and how you spend the day-to-day moments of your life (besides when youre hooking up with someone), just like someone wouldnt identify themselves as a Jewish person if they dont believe in the religion and dont practice all its rituals/etc. But an orthodox Jew who comes from strong Jewish blood who lives in a community with other orthodox Jews and only buys things within their community sees it as more than just a label (although I think they can still break free from that religion but being gay isnt something I can break free from).
 
posted by Bart
 on September 13, 2009 #
 
You said at the end If we truly want to expand the scope of freedom, we should encourage people to date who they want; not just provide more categorical boxes for them to slot themselves into. 
I have always been very careful of the different use for the word freedom. In the in the statement above I dont see the behavior you mention as expanding freedom, I see it as promoting aberrations. As for the use of the word freedom, how about we call it expanding the scope of libertinism This is really not a gray area at all, but it is convenient to see it that way. How is it that we have become a society that considers everything gray, even murder? You and I can think of many cases where in the court of law it was considered murder under special circumstances. The fact that even murder in our society has special circumstances is actually outrages. So really, it is no surprise that sex with the same gender is considered a right, not degrading. If the case for being gay is uncontrollable, D.N.A. factor, natural, I am sure that even priests can say that they have the same factors acting within themselves when they violate children. If we are not able to control our desire to do anything we will become animals, thats why I think that religion exists, if its not a tool to try to achieve becoming better, it at least serves as restrains for doing bad. But again you might say whats bad? Again we go back to the gray, and I would venture to say that there is nothing bad (Im being sarcastic, hope you can see the point). In closing I believe that we have become a society that is humane beyond its intelligence level. I hope that we go back to more defined morals and lets expand the scope of ethics instead, we have too much freedom and lost its value along the way.
 
posted by Levi
 on September 14, 2009 #
 
Levi, your rights get restricted by society where they violate those of others.  Thus, murder or violating children, whatever the supposed motivation, is illegal and immoral.
 
Consensual relationships, sex, and even marriage with the same gender does not restrict the rights of anyone.  (In fact, prohibiting it does.)
 
posted by Mike Kale
 on September 15, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September  8, 2009
 
Title: A Political Startup
 
Politics is like the weather: everybody discusses it but nobody actually does anything about it.
 
The golden dome of the Massachusetts State House rises majestically over the grass of Boston Common. The sun glints off the dome while kids play on the grass, but on the State House steps there is nobody except for a couple of my friends  and me, holding a ridiculously-large stack of paper that threatened to blow away in the breeze. This is what failure looks like, I thought.
 
Within half an hour, I found myself standing in the same place, surrounded by TV cameras and microphones on all sides, reporters throwing questions as fast as I could answer them. And the papers hadnt blown away. How did I get here?
 
At the beginning of the year, I cofounded a political action committee, the Progressive Change Campaign Committee. We had no money and no members and not much of a plan for how to get them. We wrote up long proposals for big donors on why they should write us checks, and tried negotiating with electoral candidates on why they should send us members, but neither of these were particularly successful. Then Jon Stewart attacked Jim Cramer.
 
Cramer came to symbolize the foolishness and vapidity of the media in the face of the financial crisis. His blatantly buffoonish cluelessness (Dont move your money from Bear! Thats just being silly! Dont be silly!) were the epitome of a press that championed the housing bubble and fumbled the crash. We were giddy about the press getting their day in scorn, but we wanted to accomplish positive change as well. So we hit upon the idea of starting a petition to demand CNBC hire someone who was right about the housing crisis.
 
We spread the word to friends and bloggers and before we knew it we had nearly 20,000 signatures  20,000 new members. It was quite the start.
 
A couple months later, frustrated that Norm Coleman wouldnt drop his spurious legal challenges against Al Franken being named a Senator, we started NormDollar.com. We asked people to donate a dollar each day Norm Coleman didnt drop out of the race, money wed spend electing progressive candidates. It was featured on Hardball and throughout the political press. We also videotaped Norms donors reactions when we told them about the program. But my favorite was when we presented Norm with a big novelty check for him to sign, representing all the money hed raised for progressives.
 
Now we had money too.
 
I came back from my month offline to find we were raising money for TV ads  running ads in DC pressuring representatives to support the public health care option, asking whether theyd sold out to their insurance industry campaign contributors. And when Sen. Ben Nelson started a campaign to stall the health care bill, we filmed an ad with Mike Snider. Mike talked plainly to the camera about how, as owner of the local Syzzlyn Skillet, he received a call from his insurers saying they were raising his rates by 42%. I cant afford that! he exclaimed. And then to hear his own Senator was trying to prevent health care reform?
 
Mike was just an average guy who made a real political difference. After we started airing our ad, Ben Nelsons spokesperson tried to denounce him and the Senator himself called Mike and asked to see his health care bills. Mike was a guest on The Rachel Maddow Show and his restaurant has become a base of operations for the local political community. Mikes story was so powerful that Ben Nelson was forced to put up his own ads directly responding to it  even though Nelson isnt up for reelection in years  in which he (ridiculously) calls Mike a lying DC politician.
 
Mikes story really inspired me as to the difference just one person could make, but I never thought that person would be me. When my Senator, Ted Kennedy, passed away, I wanted to honor his memory by fighting for the causes he fought for. His last request had been a letter to the Massachusetts legislature asking them to change the law and let a replacement be appointed to his seat to continue his fight for universal health care. Without the change, the seat would stay vacant for five months while an election could be scheduled  and the next five months will be crucial.
 
With the rest of the (growing) PCCC team, we came up with a plan to launch a petition asking the legislature to honor that request. We sent out an email asking people to sign and tell their friends. Within a few days, we had 20,000 signatures. I was blown away  clearly people cared.
 
Id promised to deliver the signatures on Monday, without really thinking about what that entailed. I called the office of the Senate President and Speaker of the House to ask when I could come by and film a short video of the petitions being dropped off. The President of the Senates office blew me off, insisting that under no circumstances were cameras allowed in their office and saying that the President simply couldnt meet with me. So we decided to make the delivery something they couldnt ignore.
 
We emailed our list to ask people in the area to show up on the State House steps at 11am Monday. Then we emailed the press and asked them to get there at 11:15. I stayed up all night the night before, feeding paper into the printer trying to print out 20,000 names. Then I grabbed a stack and headed to the State House.
 
The stack  600 sheets or so  kept trying to fall over and blow away and at the State House there were only a couple friends who were loaning me their camera. We decided to go in and scope out President Murrays office. When we came back, our members started arriving: old ladies with their grandchildren, college students, and everyone in between. The media started pressing closer: a photographer for the Herald, a cameraman for Fox. Microphones kept being shoved in my face and people kept asking me to spell my name. I hefted the stack of petitions and kept repeating why I was here.
 
Local TV news isnt exactly known for its crack reporters, but I have to say I was impressed by Janet Wu. She didnt just ask me the standard questions, but kept pushing me on the hard stuff, barking responses at me, not letting me off the hook. The other reporters smelled blood and joined in. Soon I was at the center of a full scrum of cameras and microphones  surrounded on all sides, every local TV station there. I like to think I comported myself well: I didnt get angry or flustered, I refused to me taken off-message, I kept stressing that this was about doing what the people wanted.
 
(Later, away from the cameras, Wu was a completely different person. Hey there, little guy, she cooed at a grandchild. Hey, its OK, you can talk to me. Actually, I thought the kid might have the right idea by staying quiet.)
 
At some point all the cameras dematerialized. OK, go in, someone said. Just pretend were not here. Theyd all rematerialized down the street, to film us marching into the capitol, stack of signatures in hand.
 
Believe it or not, its not easy to walk into the state capitol holding 600 pieces of paper with TV cameras in front of you and a crowd of supporters behind. I kept wondering where to look and trying not to lose the rest of the crowd. Who knows how that footage came out. And when I got up the steps the reporters dematerialized again and rematerialized inside at the Senate Presidents office, to film us marching down the hallway. We entered her office and all crowded in  I didnt think we were all going to fit, but we just barely did. The receptionist  in the middle of a phone call  looked a bit flustered. We waited patiently. Soon a broad-shouldered man in a suit came out. Thanks so much for the petitions, he said, taking them from me. The proposal will go through the usual process. He turned to head out. I was dumbstruck.
 
But, bravely, one of the older women spoke up. Wait, she said. The normal process? Isnt this a matter of some urgency? All I can say is it will go through the usual process. Those women wouldnt let him go. But eventually he did, looking the perfect image of the arrogant unconcerned Boston pol, and Janet Wu stuck a microphone in my face. Do you feel satisfied? she asked. I started to speak but she interrupted. Wait. OK, go again: Do you feel satisfied?
 
Outside, a cameraman turned the bright lights on one of the older woman. She was saying, far more clearly and convincingly than me, that no, she wasnt satisfied. That this was an important issue and she wanted to be heard. I was so glad she came.
 
And then the press and the supporters dematerialized again. I was left, once again, alone with just my friends. We stood in the hallway trying to process what just happened. We caught the man whod taken the petitions as he was coming out of the office. So, what is your actual title? I asked. Director of Communications, he said.
 
And where is the Senate President really? asked a friend. Oh, shes in Russia, he explained. Russia? Yeah, shes helping with a nonprofit to assist orphaned children. Pre-scheduled trip. She does it every year. Youre saying she cant meet with us because shes in Russia saving orphans? I asked. Thats a pretty incredible excuse. We all laughed. He headed off down the hallway.
 
Wait, one more thing, a friend called after him. Wheres a good place around here we can get some lunch?
 
Please, sign our petition.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September  8, 2009
 
This is good, sir!  Good read.  Good movement.  Good start.  Ive signed on & anxiously await your next update.
 
posted by Pablo
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
This would be great except Im not confident that youre taking the time to listen to thoughtful people who disagree with you.  Simply doing whatever the majority wants is not a sufficient justification because the majority is not always right.
 
Some day Im going to write a story about a phone hacker who figures out that he can simulate a call from any person in the country to any congressperson.  So he assembles a team of nonpartisan economists to have discussions about what sort of policies the nation should enact, freed from the requirement of having to look good on television.  Using his phone skills he manufactures public opinion to make it look like everyone wants what the economists recommend.  Im not exactly sure how the story would end though.  Stories need to have problems, and this scenario doesnt have any.
 
posted by John
 on September 12, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: September  7, 2009
 
Title: The Trouble with Nonprofits
 
In the 1990s, a group of psychologists began studying what made experts expert. Their first task was to see whether experts really were expert  whether they were particularly good at their jobs.
 
What they found was that some were and some werent. Champion chess players, obviously, are much better at playing chess than you and I. But political pundits, it turns out, arent that much better at making predictions than a random guy off the street.
 
What distinguishes people who are great at what they do from those who are just mediocre? The answer, it seems, is feedback. If you lose a chess game, its pretty obvious you lost. You know right away, you feel bad, and you start thinking about what you did wrong and how you can improve.
 
Making a bad prediction isnt like that. First, its months or years before your prediction is proven wrong. And then, you make yourself feel better by coming up with some explanation for why you were wrong: well, nobody expected that to happen; it threw everything else off! And so you keep on making predictions in the same way  which means you never get good at it.
 
The difference between chess and predictions is a lot like the difference between companies and nonprofits. If your company is losing money, its pretty obvious. You know right away, you feel bad, and you start thinking about how to fix it. (And if you dont fix it, you go bankrupt.) But if your nonprofit isnt accomplishing its goals, its much less obvious. You can point to various measurable signs of success (look at all the members we have, look at all the articles weve been quoted in) and come up with all sorts of explanations for why its not your fault.
 
This isnt to say that we should have companies replace nonprofits, any more than we should have chess games replace predictions. The two serve completely different goals  nonprofits aim at improving the world, not making money. But it does mean that if youre involved in nonprofits (or predictions), you need to be much more careful about making sure youre doing a good job.
 
Unfortunately, few nonprofits do that. Take, for example, the Center for American Progress, widely believed to be one of the most effective political nonprofits. They say their goal is improving the lives of Americans through ideas and action. But their marketing brochure, while filled with glossy photos, doesnt even attempt to see whether theyre accomplishing this goal. It touts that theyve released an economic strategy for the next administration, convened a task force  to develop policy, and developed a plan for the bulk transfer auction of at-risk mortgages. Theres not a single attempt to demonstrate that any of these things has approved the lives of Americans, let alone estimate how much.
 
Measuring things is hard and expensive, even in the simplest cases. Measuring the effect of loaning money to Africans seems a lot easier than measuring the impact of of a think tank report. But when Peter Singer asked Oxfam to measure the effectiveness of giving microcredit to villages in West Africa, they declined, on the grounds that it would have taken up half the budget.
 
But not measuring is even more expensive. Imagine that Oxfam experimented with two microcredit programs and found that one did 10% better than the other. Even with this very modest improvement, it would only take helping five villages before the experiment paid for itself.
 
And, as anyone whos done these sorts of experiments knows, you often see improvements well in excess of 10%. To take a silly example, Dustin Curtis experimented with getting more readers of his weblog to follow him on Twitter. After four experiments, hed achieved a 173% improvement. And even this is probably underestimating things. I expect many nonprofits are not accomplishing their goals at all. Even if they made a little bit of progress, their improvement would be mathematically infinite. (Its also quite possible that many nonprofits are actually being counter-productive. After all, before we started measuring the effects of medical treatment, we were bleeding people with leeches.)
 
What can be done about this? I think that everyone who donates to a nonprofit should demand an accounting of results  not just the number of times theyve been cited in the media or the number of policy discussions theyve held, but an actual attempt to measure how much theyre improving peoples lives. For most nonprofits, I expect these numbers will be depressingly small. But thats much better than having no numbers at all. For feeling bad about failing is the first step to doing better next time.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September  7, 2009
 
Ive seen measurement also lead to its own set of dysfunctions.  Among educational nonprofits, measurement is constant and the results are reflected quickly in funding.  But the result doesnt look very good to me  theres more obsession with the form of the measurement and how it can be presented, than with the goals themselves.  It is not creating a set of professionals thoughtfully experimenting, reflecting, and using that feedback to adjust their process.  They could do this, measurement need not create this effect, but it isnt right now.
 
posted by Ian Bicking
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
You can read lots about measuring the impact of charities here: http://www.givewell.net/
 
posted by Brian Slesinsky
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
To my mind, this isnt news, but that might be in part because Ive worked in my familys grant writing firm for so long. The real issue youre discussing is one of incentives: nonprofits dont have much incentive to measure how well theyre doing because funders dont demand that they do, or at least dont as a large group.
 
If the funder is federal, state, or local, the funder doesnt have the resources (or the brains) to really measure effectiveness; if the funder is a foundation, the funder probably cares more about the appearance of doing good than effectiveness. Ive addressed this point in some detail here: http://blog.seliger.com/2008/01/04/more-on-charities and here: http://blog.seliger.com/2008/01/23/foundations-and-the-future . The blow, which I contribute to, deals with the issues you raise on a regular basis, and if you want to learn more about why things are the way they are at the moment, take a look at the archives.
 
posted by Jake
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
And of course, governments are the biggest nonprofits of all.
 
posted by Gordon Mohr
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
Having both founded a non-profit and helped foundations give away money to non-profits, I think the situation is a bit more complicated and nuanced than portrayed here.
 
Non-profits and companies are huge categories. Some non-profits have very specific goals (lets say improving handicapped accessibility to public facilities in a limited geographic region) which are at least as measurable as those of your average for-profit companies.
 
And some companies have very different metrics of success than others. Over the past 15 years, many larger companies have been deemed to be underperforming if they werent growing exponentially; but a Mom-and-Pop store on a main street does not need to do more than survive and provide a living to its handful of employees.
 
Some companies rate themselves based solely on relatively concrete measures such as profitability and market share, while others include softer criteria (such as image, customer and employee satisfaction).
 
Taking the Twitter example, one could easily poke holes in even a touted 173% improvement in the number of people following a blogger on Twitter. Did the increase in Twitter followers lead to more people actually visiting the blog, or did it become a subsitute for reading the full post? Did readers spend less time on the site as a result of being able to access the Twitter summary? Over time, did the increase sustain itself, or did people un-follow the blogger after the initial spate of interest? Did the push by the blogger merely hasten the acquisition of Twitter followers which would have happened without the big push, increasing the blogs number of followers to the natural number it was going to achieve anyway, or did it get people to follow the blogger who otherwise wouldnt have?
 
Without a doubt, some non-profits  like many businesses  do not actually reach their goals. But I would argue from experience that non-profits do get held accountable over the long haul to much the same extent as commercial enterprises, maybe even moreso. Donors and members have to be rationally convinced to part with their dollars for charity, and when the product is less tangible (e.g. improving liteacy in a distant country) that case can be hard to sustain year-after-year even when the organization is doing great work.
 
And so on. I appreciate the basic point of this post, but I do believe the profit/non-profit divide is less black-and-white than portrayed.
 
posted by Sam Pratt
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
P.S. I meant to add that in my experience, serious grantmakers giving out more than small sums do in fact tend to demand that applicants for funding include metrics for evaluation, and that future largesse is dependent on a credible demonstration that these goals are met. And some funders are reluctant to fund the same projects year-after-year even when the project is demonstrating success, just on general principle. I think those outside of the non-profit sector tend to overestimate the challenge of funding such entities.
 
posted by Sam Pratt
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
Typo: overestimate >>> underestimate
 
posted by Sam Pratt
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
Lots of people are working on this:
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Esther_Duflo
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Easterly
 
Of course most political pressure groups cant measure the effects of their actions, and even if they did have direct policy changes they could point to, its a delicate matter to claim credit and keep their relationships with the political class. Success has many fathers.
 
posted by Gabe
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
This is the sole reason why I chose to donate to Kiva.org over some other options.  The repayment of funds is direct feedback that my donation actually worked.
 
posted by haig
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
Spot on. One shouldnt lump together all non-profits, however, as some have been speaking out about this for quite some time. For example, Acumen Funds Jacqueline Novogratz: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacqueline_Novogratz
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
Steve Jobs talked in an interview about that, The fact that he can measure if one of his ideas works or not just trying it, and some doesnt work(like the Apple Newton).
 
He just let the people decide. With non profits, he said, you cant know if you are expending good the money.
 
posted by Jose
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
Some of my colleagues who worked for educational non-profits in downtown DC noticed that when they turned to measured metrics (and this reminded me of my own experience in the UK with research funding) the organization became too cautious with high risk initiatives. Instead they tried more incremental improvements or didnt attempt to try something interesting at all.
 
Im a great believer in measuring what can be measured but theres also a reason why the MacArthur Genius Grants arrive with non-strings attached. No metrics, high risk, but the payoff can be big. This is why I think a lot of non-profits are reluctant to do metrics, they worry it will limit their opportunities to do something high risk.
 
posted by Paul Guinnessy
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
But not measuring is even more expensive. Imagine that Oxfam experimented with two microcredit programs and found that one did 10% better than the other. Even with this very modest improvement, it would only take helping five villages before the experiment paid for itself.
 
Using the assumptions from this paragraph and the previous and Oxfams actual expenses shows that it would take more than seven years in the most optimistic calculation for Oxfam to come out ahead by deciding to measure. And if the new microcredit program actually turns out to be worse than the standard, Oxfam has lost half a years budget for no gain.
 
And, as anyone whos done these sorts of experiments knows, you often see improvements well in excess of 10%.
 
How many people do you know who have done experiments in microcredit? or if you meant just experiments in general, I think it would be much more effective for you to take a a year or two off from your current diversions to (easily) develop a strategy to generate 10% excess returns on Wall Street and then pump your financial windfall back into your pet causes.
 
posted by Mark
 on September  9, 2009 #
 
This post conjures up a good double bill: Adam Curtis THE TRAP,  and THE WIRE: measuring, targets, non-profit institutions, gaming the system.
 
Im still mourning the loss of the community centre at the end of my street. It seems someone decided it should be run like a private fitness club so that its efficiency could be measured. No one seemed to have closely interrogated the business model of private fitness clubs, or considered the centre might have immeasurable social value. The centre failed to be profitable and closed down.
 
I live in a mostly lower income, black neighbourhood. We have undoubtedly spent the money we saved on the centre on healthcare and police. I believe the plan for the future is to turn it into luxury condos. Perhaps after that we can turn the housing estate into a fitness centre ;-)
 
posted by Brad Bell
 on September 10, 2009 #
 
A similarity Ive noticed among top administrators in D.C.-based nonprofits is that they are unable to refrain from moralizing, which should be unnecessary, as a good plan is quantifiably robust.
 
posted by Pablo
 on September 11, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 27, 2009
 
Title: Why I Wont Use Rimuhosting
 
I originally got a VPS at Rimuhosting because their website lauded their fanatical service and a friend had concurred. In September 2006, I ordered my first server.
 
In December, a friend asked if I knew any good VPS hosts. I said I used Rimuhosting and hadnt had any problems. Thats funny, he replied. rimuhosting is the company thats just given me horrible support over the last 2 weeks. No answers to email for 2+ days, then a claim that they didnt receive it, then I send them the mail server log that says they should have received it, then they say oh, thats interesting. oh well.
 
I guess that should have been a sign for me. But instead, he changed his tune: Well, if everyone thinks theyre so great, maybe Ill give them another chance.
 
The server went down for maintenance three times and was moved to a new IP once. In April 2008, the real trouble started. I was dinged for bandwidth overruns, apparently because Yahoo! was crawling the same files on my server hundreds of times a day. In June, they complained I was monopolizing the CPU, even though when I logged in the machine was 100% idle. They complained again in October and November and December and offered to take a look at the problem if I gave them root on the box. Over my dead body, I thought.
 
In December they set a CPU cap on my VPS. Then came the amazing bit. Despite already having sold me a VPS and put a CPU cap on my usage of it, they manually edited my partition to add their SSH key to my authorized_keys, used that to gain root on my box, noticed that a CGI script was using up CPU, and responded by turning off Apache. They didnt even try to call me to talk about it in advance. They didnt even call me at all. They just sent a little email. After the fact. The subject? index.cgi is causing high CPU usage
 
I asked them what was going on. Here was their reply:
 
In our welcome email we do mention that we have installed our key on your server.
 
We use that to help our customers.  You are able to remove that if you are not comfortable with that.
 
Of course, I did remove it. They used their control of the hardware to add it back in.
 
We work to ensure that customers get a fair share of the CPU, and that their servers perform well.
 
If everyone is trying to max out the CPU then everyones performance will be poor.  We can set it so that you get a fixed amount of CPU (and then we dont mind how much CPU want to use).  Or we can let your CPU burst up to 100% of a host server CPU core, in which case your server will run fast, but in which case wed need to make sure you do not monopolize the CPU.
 
Or, they can break into my box and turn off my webserver. Oddly they dont mention that last option.
 
If you think we can help in any other way, e.g. investigating that script or anything, just let us know.
 
I suppose this is the service Rimuhosting is known for. I wont be taking advantage of it again.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 27, 2009
 
I have used Rimu for several years now, and have recommended them to numerous clients.
 
It is true they add a key to gain root access, which I was duly informed about.  However, if I didnt like it I could delete the key.
 
I had a case where they identified a problem with one of our server processes that had gone wild and used up enough memory that Linux started killing processes to keep itself alive.  I got an email from them indicating this issue  they noticed that my database server was down before I did.  I am very surprised that there was no communication via any of their supported channels after that action.  Are you sure?
 
I think youre being a little unfair.  Any process that pegs the CPU is pretty much a rogue process, IMHO.  It sounds like your issue was how they handled it.  Our cases are similar: for me, they saved some downtime.
 
Their service has been truly exceptional for the several years I have used them.
 
Anyway, its your option to not like them :-).  I just thought they deserved a chance to have an alternate view.
 
Tom
 
posted by Tom Harrison
 on August 27, 2009 #
 
I can recommend Joyent accelerators as an alternative. They use OpenSolaris containers, which IMO is superior technology.
 
posted by Fazal Majid
 on August 27, 2009 #
 
This sort of problem is a great reason to go with a Xen-based VPS host. Xen actually does resource limiting between VPSs properly which would have avoided this entire mess.
 
posted by Mike Cantelon
 on August 27, 2009 #
 
Rimuhosting does use Xen.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 27, 2009 #
 
I know it shouldnt matter, but you think theyd have some canned responses that had been proofread.  (customers)
 
posted by Rich Wilson
 on August 27, 2009 #
 
I have to say that Ive been using Rimuhosting for a couple of years and have always been amazed by their service. If they added back their SSH key after you had removed it then thats pretty terrible, but generally when dealing with their support people I feel Im talking to clued up people who are actually care about getting stuff fixed. Seems like they went a bit too far in your case.
 
posted by Rich
 on August 27, 2009 #
 
Youre a moron. Get a dedicated box with a reliable company.  Wanting a good VPS setup is like asking for a girlfriend that also wants you to sleep with her friends  Aint happenin.
 
posted by anon
 on August 27, 2009 #
 
They use Xen, but dont know how to throttle CPU per VPS. Yikes. I will make sure I avoid them.
 
posted by Mike Cantelon
 on August 28, 2009 #
 
Give slicehost a try. I hear good things.
 
posted by 
 on August 28, 2009 #
 
+1 for slicehost, and also definitely these dudes really tempted to try it
http://prgmr.com/xen/
 
posted by Todd Troxell
 on August 28, 2009 #
 
Have to disagree about Joyent accelerators.  Mine (with their image) was unstable, going down ever month or so and they were a hassle to deal with.  After 6 months of poor replies I left, issue still unresolved.
 
posted by Josh
 on August 28, 2009 #
 
Aw, manId never heard of Rimuhosting until last night, when I started researching java (ie scala :) hosting. They looked greatjava specialists, start at $20/mo, scale up to monster dedicated servers if necessary. I thought Id found my host.
 
Now I check the aggregator and find this post.
 
Id use slicehost, but I think my setup might be really ram-heavy after a whileram is cheap and rimu pricing reflects that. Slicehost doesnt have an option for adding lots of ram cheap.
 
I guess I could bite the bullet and start with dedicated, but itd be nice to keep it cheap for starters in case traffic stays light.
 
posted by Dennis
 on September  1, 2009 #
 
It seems you guys in the US get really raw deals in the hosting business.
Looking at the rimu page they ask $49 for the biggest VPS which has not that great stats after all.
 
In Germany e.g. you get a dedicated root server with a Core i7, 8 GB Ram and 750 GB Raid 1 Disks for 49  (~ $70)
 
For example here: http://www.hetzner.de/en/hosting/produktmatrix/rootserver-produktmatrix/Produktmatrix
 
posted by Ulrich Petri
 on September  8, 2009 #
 
I agree with the issues that others have had with RimuHosting. They used to be great, until, on top of a number of similar occurrences to those mentioned, one day they completely WIPED my VPS and I was forced to restore from week-old backups.
This was supposedly due to a security compromise that was actually a non-issue. I was running portsentry, which was listening on a number commonly exploited ports, for the purpose of denying port scans.
I had changed my recorded root password, as to deny access. So, during a routine security scan  of their network (which had never been performed before), a rep saw a number of trojan ports open on the box (their scanning host would have been blocked and all ports would have shown closed, if they had thought to try again). So, they saw the ports open, tried to log in as root, were denied, and assumed the machine was compromised. And reformatted it.
This is TERRIBLE from a security standpoint, as no forensics would have been possible if it HAD in fact been compromised. Instead, they wiped all evidence that would have been present. No knowledge of the origin of the attacker or methodology involved.
I would have recommended powering it down and notifying me, or at least denying all network traffic to the machine. Instead, after a few failed attempts, I log into a fresh install, with no data at all. I was not even notified  I had to contact them to find out what happened. Their response: Oh, we will note this on your account so this doesnt happen again. Yeah thanks.
Needless to say, that was enough cause for me to take my service elsewhere.
 
posted by elixx
 on December  8, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 25, 2009
 
Title: Google Voice Security Flaw
 
Google Voice allows you to get a new telephone number (a Google Voice number) and when people dial that number, Google will patch the call through to your various other phones. That way you can give people one phone number and it will ring your home phone, your cell phone, your work phone. (Apparently this is a service for people who still have home and work phones.)
 
It now requires new phones to go through a verification process to be added to that list, but I believe that phones that were added back when Google Voice was GrandCentral (Google bought it) are carried over and never required verification.
 
You can also create rules for which phones ring. I set mine up so that if the callbox at our apartment calls the Google Voice number (i.e. someone is trying to get into the apartment), it rings both me and my roommate. Otherwise it just rings me.
 
Now heres the odd thing: when my roommate texts someone with a Google Voice number (or vice versa), their SMS chats show up in my Google Voice account. It took me a long time to figure out what was going on  at first it just looked like other peoples SMS chats were just appearing in my inbox. But it now seems clear that Google Voice looks at the phone number of incoming SMSes and, if its attached to an account, stores the SMSes in that account.
 
I suppose one should trust their roommate, but I think people should be aware of this issue nonetheless.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 25, 2009
 
You might try checking your roommates phone number settings in your Google Voice account. If it is set as a Mobile number you could try clicking Edit, and turning off the Receive SMS on this phone. I dont know if that would correct this problem, but it is worth a shot.
 
posted by Jason McPheron
 on August 25, 2009 #
 
Im not worried for my own sake; Im worried for my roommates. That I could take measures to keep from looking at her texts doesnt address the basic security issue: that I can look at her texts.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 25, 2009 #
 
ooooh that explains it.
 
posted by quinn
 on August 26, 2009 #
 
I wouldnt truly call this a security flaw, as this is one of the core features of Google Voice.  As GV is designed to receive SMS messages without the need for a mobile device to receive the messages, they must be stored on the account.
 
If you are both worried about it, the only course of action is to correct those sending SMS messages to the GV number by having them send directly to the mobile device.
 
posted by Brent Mullen
 on August 26, 2009 #
 
They should be stored in the account of the person theyre sent to, not some-account-that-might-be-plausibly-related-to the sender.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 26, 2009 #
 
Ah, after a careful re-read I think I see what you are saying.  I might have to play around with that a bit.
 
posted by Brent Mullen
 on August 26, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 24, 2009
 
Title: The Newswipe Manifesto
 
Charlie Brooker begins his recent BBC4 show Newswipe with this speech. Unfortunately, the show doesnt quite live up to these ambitions, being basically a version of Charlie Brookers Screenwipe focused on the news, but they seem like the right ambitions to me.
 

 
Back in 1919, when I was a kid and my throat was less sore, I always assumed adults knew what was what. So imagine my horror, on growing up, to discover that actually were all just winging it. As adults, theres a whole range of things youre supposed to know about and have opinions on: everything from what wine to serve at your twatty dinner party through to whats going on in the world of current affairs.
 
Yes, it turns out you were supposed to be paying attention to the news all this time. Although the chances are you havent, at least not really. I mean, when were you meant to start? When youre a kid, the news is effectively out of bounds. Its a program aimed at adults thats either impenetrably boring (the economy minister for the economy today said interest rates were discombobulating the trade union a) or downright terrifying (murdered horses and terrorists today said that you and your mummy and daddy are certain to die in a global ap).
 
Anyway, the end result is that you ignore the news for years and then suddenly, somewhere down the line when youre a bit older, theres comes a point when you realize youre completely bloody ignorant. Maybe you find yourself sitting next to some erudite fker at a dinner party whos banging on about the Israel-Palestine situation or maybe you start going out with an opinionated news junkie who wants to discuss politics for 60,000 hours. Either way, your comparative ignorance leaves you ashamed. So you do something about it: you pick up a paper or you switch on the news. But because youve fallen behind its like tuning into episode 803 of the worlds most complex soap opera.
 
And at the same time the news itself is becoming less of an easily digestible summary of events and more of a grotesque entertainment reality show with heavy emphasis on emotion and sensation and a swaggering comically theatrical sense of its own importance.
 
In the end you just give up and, yes, you wing it: you form knee-jerk opinions about the sort of thing thats in the news. Politicians and newsmakers notice, which is why everythings geared more and more to sound bites and razzle-dazzle. The soap opera analogy is a sound one because thats what the news has become.
 
Its showbiz, basically, and as a consequence the news has become just another rolling TV show whos meaning is lost somewhere amongst all the babble. Sometimes its happy and sometimes its sad, but somehow, it isnt real.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 24, 2009
 
Any particular news story is the latest point in a historical time line.  Every news story relies to some extent on a given amount of knowledge that the viewer has of history.  Like it is often said: Every story has a back story.
 
I hate to see real journalism suffer as the internet becomes the main source for news, but with the internet is the capability for news providers to layout each story within the context of history.  So far the only type of any real time line comes in the form of related stories in a side bar listed in chronological order of publish date.
 
People are a lot less somnolent then the perception television news and even the online papers convey (WaPo, NY Times, Slate and MoJo are the extent of my online subscriptions, so if I am about to describe a news source that already exists, please let me know.)  Anyone capable of understanding a news story they have read is capable of understanding the limit of the context the story.  It may be counter intuitive for news sources to put stories in the context of a time line, since it will expose the latency and gaps of and in their coverage, any reader that would opt for being relatively informed over making knee jerk conclusions would appreciate such a forthcoming format.
 
posted by James Hardy
 on August 25, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 20, 2009
 
Title: What Kind of a Thing is Twitter?
 
Do you ever eavesdrop on random people? At the office, on the subway, in a park  if youre quiet, you can listen to people chat. If you do, you quickly find that, for the most part, they have conversations that seem perfectly boring. This is most obvious on IRC (Internet text chat) where, since the conversations are entirely textual, they can be perfectly transcribed. If you look at the transcripts later, you find theyre often almost unreadable  even in channels dedicated to very technical topics, youll find hours of conversation about someones dog.
 
Such conversation clearly does not perform an objective information-sharing function  the relevant facts about the dog can be laid out in a paragraph (if that). It serves a social function  a function with a deep evolutionary history. Primates get to know each other through grooming each others fur. But thats time-consuming; as a result, primates rarely form groups larger than 25. One of the big breakthroughs for humans was moving from grooming to gossip. Instead of 25 people, the average human knows 150. And so we talk, and as we talk we reveal our personalities to each other: the things we care about, the way we think, the subjects we understand. We make friends through this process of conversation and personality reveal, even though objectively the conversation is about matters that seem trivial. When it comes to our friends, we know a lot of trivia.
 
What Twitter1 does is automate this process. Instead of telling your bit of gossip or joke or humdrum story or minor complaint to each of your friends as you see them, you tell it once to Twitter, and then all your friends can see it. And just like the transition from grooming to gossip, Twitter allows for an explosion in the number of people we know. Where, in the past, it was only practical to have these kinds of close, chatty friendships with a handful of people (even using a technology like IM), now  using the power of the Web to bridge time and space  you can have them with hundreds.
 
But the relationships need not be symmetrical. One of the things thats clear about celebrities in the age of television is that they take advantage of this innate social sense. (Fahrenheit 451 is caustic on this subject.) We see these people all the time, we listen to them, we watch them  and we come to feel as if we know them. And so, naturally, our innate social sense kicks in and we want to hear their gossip  a need tabloids try their best to fill.
 
Twitter provides a more raw, unmediated access to celebrity gossip. Instead of hearing about it second-hand from TV news, we hear about it straight from them. Oprah, of course, has been a pioneer of this: with a daily long-form television show, shes been able to cultivate (and monetize) a friendship with millions. But most celebrities dont have that kind of access to their followers. They do on Twitter.
 
The catch, of course, is that its all somewhat fake. What you see on Oprahs show isnt the real Oprah; its a hyperreal Oprah, a carefully-crafted simulation of a gregarious friend chatting with you in your living room  makeup, lighting, sets, and script are all carefully planned to seem natural. And most Twitter feeds are the same  humorists spend days polishing the one-liner they seem to carelessly toss off, politicians have speechwriters thinking up soundbites that they can tweet.
 
But its not just fake, its empty. The reason such apparently boring conversation is interesting is because the act of conversation itself reveals your personality. We assume we know the people whose petty complaints and daily routines weve heard so much about because, traditionally, the only way to hear such things was to get to know them well. But its impossible to really know someone through sanitized soundbites. In 140 characters, theres little room for the nuances of personality such conversation typically reveals. So, like Oprahs audience, we all see the carefully-prepared facade people want to present, and come away thinking that we know them better than we really do.
 
With people we know in real life, this isnt such a big deal. We already know their personality; Twitter simply helps maintain our relationship by keeping us up-to-date. And while, in doing so, it lets us maintain vastly more relationships, Im not sure this is a bad thing. Many people are starved for human relationship  we spend most of our lives at the office, or at home watching TV and playing video games. Most Americans live in suburbs with no street life and even in cities everyones wearing iPods and thus unable to stop and chat. If Twitter can help bring us together in an increasingly isolated world, then all the better (and, it seems, with some positive political consequences as well).
 
But, for the people we dont know, it has the effect of making them all Oprah. In the same way her millions of fans trust her book (and movie and health and plastic surgery) recommendations unquestioningly, because they feel that they know her, Twitter can make us trust other celebrities. If you feel like your Senator is a personal friend (and how can you not, after hearing them tell you about their struggle to lose weight and the guy they met at the gym?), then how could you possibly vote against them?
 
This isnt new, of course. It goes back as far as radio (possibly further). Pappy ODaniel did it in Texas in the 1940s. He got on the radio every day at noon and just chatted, like an old friend  sang a few songs, read a little of his poetry, but mostly he just talked with quiet cheer. And people treated him like a friend: he asked them to buy his flour (simply other companies flour repackaged with his picture on it and resold at a higher price) and they bought it. He asked them to vote for him and they elected him Governor of Texas in a landslide  whereupon, not knowing anything about politics, he plunged the state government into turmoil and disaster. But he kept up those daily broadcasts  now conducted from the Governors mansion  and they kept on reelecting him. He was their friend, after all.
 
Twitter probably isnt going to make THE_REAL_SHAQ governor, but I dont think its crazy to worry about it having similar effects. Luckily, it also provides the tools for undoing these relationships. For the housewives stuck at home with the TV, Oprah is the only option. But on Twitter, at the same time you sign up to hear from Oprah, you can also follow  and cement your relationship with  more real friends. And its a good thing too, because with all these fake friends running around, were going to need all the real ones we can get.
 
Ill say Twitter because its become the accepted term, but obviously this applies to similar services like identi.ca.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 20, 2009
 
I would not be surprised if THE_REAL_SHAQ ran for political office.  Hes retiring from basketball next year.
 
posted by Jim Gilliam
 on August 20, 2009 #
 
Interesting view point . sometime back Tim Bray of Sun made an interesting post explaining the communication medium available to us . http://www.tbray.org/ongoing/When/200x/2007/11/23/Communication
 
as a communication medium Twitter has some unique combination of traits.
 
your point about carefully crafted message polluting the medium by creating a false perception about the person apply for every medium  . but you are missing a point here . for example  I know excellent, opinionated, revolutionary activist blogger  who are extremely shy in person and cant stand up against their landlady .are they fake ? when I ask them (after a few drinks of course ) What is real you ? they say the real me is there only on my blog . So out side of politically motivated agenda driven PR whores ,whenever you see a common man acting Fake on things like blog,twitter  its mostly due to his residual self image trying to find a vent .
 
posted by Prashant Singh
 on August 20, 2009 #
 
In no way does Twitter supplant friendship. Nor does it claim to. Nor, do I imagine, that most of our users think that the interesting strangers they follow are friends.
 
Not even real-life conversation with a person gives you any guarantee that youre getting the real person. We all have different personas and voices for different interactions. Having another medium - a blessedly terse medium - in which people can hone their authorial voice is a boon. It is another style of communication to master, but not a replacement for what came before it. All new communications media are accumulative.
 
Im puzzled by the criticism that Twitter has become a place for celebrities. While Im certainly aware that we have celebrities on our service, Im not forced to follow them. I think I follow maybe 5, and theyre fairly minor celebrities at that. If you find the communication with a celebrity (or any other user) on Twitter empty, simply unfollow them. Just as the mainstream media may be tasteful, nobody is prying your eyes open and forcing you to watch or read or listen; if anything, undesirable content is easier to avoid on Twitter than on most forms of communication.
 
New media are not a threat to some more innately authenticate, measurably human way of being and interacting. Peoples credulity and willingness to be manipulated by other people -  whether those people are shouting from a mountaintop, talking into a radio station microphone, or texting into a mobile phone - is a perpetual function of education, circumstance, and opportunity.
 
posted by Alex Payne
 on August 20, 2009 #
 
In what way is this different from blogs, or books, or any other mediation? Or is that the point and I was being just a bit thick?
 
I do think all this mediated pseudo friendship is good, in a way, because I think it makes it harder for Pappy ODaniels to pull that shit en masse. Theres a lot of competition, and when everyone has all sorts of different fake friends its easier to be skeptical. You can tell theyre fake when you get a selection of them. Pappy ODaniel benefitted from being singular in a much smaller field of mediation, largely playing to people that would gather in wonderment to watch a real life chopper land.
 
But this is very much like my belief that unreliable info on the net is good, because it gets people questioning what they read. Which they dont when its in books.
 
posted by quinn
 on August 21, 2009 #
 
What is gossip? We talk to people all day long. In our living rooms, on the couch. We feel like we know them! All we really know is what they say in their voice, and the emotions they show on their face.
 
How do you really know someone? Its in their fur. Only by picking through their fur can you really see: crumbs of what they ate for dinner, sweat, remnants of how they spent their day.
 
 Sarcasm aside: the point you make is true, you cant make tough decisions based on fake empty friendships any more than you can make them based on real ones. The fact that people will suspend reason to favor loyalty isnt an indictment of twitter, its an indictment of people.
 
posted by JOSEPH
 on August 21, 2009 #
 
You might enjoy a Guardian column I wrote a little while ago:
 
Twitter: suckers game that boosts elite
 
I see youre getting some of the same types of reactions as I did, for being less than completely besotted with the wonders of broadcasting and group-grooming. And chat!
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on August 22, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 18, 2009
 
Title: How to Save A Life
 
In 1972, the philosopher Peter Singer proposed a simple thought experiment: Imagine youre on your way to work and you come across a child drowning in a shallow pond. Youre tall enough that you can run in and rescue him, but if you do so youll ruin your new suit. Should you save the child?
 
Almost everyone says yes: the value of saving a childs life far outweighs the cost of losing your new suit. Indeed, someone who would let a child die to save their clothes seems like a monster.
 
But aha, Singer says. You  yes, you, the reader  probably spent several hundred dollars on new clothes recently, clothes you didnt really need. (Or if not clothes, perhaps a dinner out, or music, or books you couldve gotten from the library.) And instead of spending that money on luxuries, you could have sent it to Partners in Health, and they could have used it to save a childs life in the developing world. (GiveWell estimates that you can save a life for between $150-$750.) How are you not a monster?
 
Calling your audience monsters is a dangerous move  its apt to make them very upset. (I know I got very upset the first time I read this argument!) Nobody wants to be thought of as a murderer, so people come up with all sorts of rationalizations for why they dont give (its not my responsibility, I do my fair share, foreign aid doesnt really do any good, etc.). In his recent book, The Life You Can Save, Singer sets about systematically debunking these arguments.
 
In the process, he complicates his original thought experiment. Imagine now that instead of just you walking by the pond, five people are. And imagine that five children are also drowning. Still, he argues, most people would say you should rush in to save a child  even if the other people passing by dont.
 
But theres one detail Singer leaves out  one that I think dramatically affects his conclusions: the children didnt just wander into this pond on their own; they were pushed.
 
Imagine an evil man stands above the pond, grabbing children and throwing them in. People passing by see the children and rush in to try to save them, but as soon as one is saved or drowns, in goes another, and another, and another. You can rush in to try to save another child  or you can try to stop the man.
 
This doesnt absolve you of moral duty. Most people do neither  they just walk on by the pond. But it does complicate the question. I think most people would say you should try to stop the man, if you can. Even a utilitarian analysis would suggest this: diving in the pond saves one life, stopping the man saves thousands.
 
The man, of course, is economics. People in the developing world are poor because they live in poor countries  countries without schools or good jobs or welfare programs or even running water. And their countries are poor in large part because of us.
 
Its often said that visiting a developing country is like traveling back in time  the conditions seem little changed from those of medieval Europe. But how did medieval Europe stop being medieval Europe? The answer is through protectionism: Britain became the reigning world power by being one of the most protectionist countries on earth, expending enormous amounts of government money to promote local industries. Eventually these industries grew strong enough to compete on the world stage and it withdrew the barriers. The United States eventually surpassed it with more of the same  many long years of tariffs and industrial intervention (to this day the US government spends an enormous amount of money on R&D). Western Europe, the so-called Asian tigers  all the major developed countries of our era got there by following these principles.
 
But they dont want others to follow in their footsteps. Instead of letting developing countries grow and compete in their own right, theyd prefer to use them as a source of cheap labor and raw materials. So enormous effort has been expended on building international institutions to prevent their economic growth. The World Bank and the IMF issue loans to countries, but only on the condition they dismantle all forms of protectionism. The WTO requires countries to agree to principles of free trade. Academic experts come up with reasons why protectionism really hurts everyone and rewrite the history of economic growth.
 
As a result, poor countries are forced to stay poor and children keep dying in shallow ponds.
 
Stopping this is hard. I can give you a phone number to call to donate to Oxfam and buy a child life-saving treatment. Theres no comparably-effective way to help reform the WTO. Nobody knows how to stop the evil man. But it seems weird to pretend that he doesnt exist.
 
Singer considers this a purely practical question. As a utilitarian, he doesnt support the notion that we have any special responsibility for the actions of our government. Instead, he says, people should donate to help the poor in the most effective way they can see  whether thats saving lives or structural reform is up to them. But Singer pretty clearly doesnt think structural reform is very effective; all of his examples are about people directly saving lives.
 
Would the passers-by really just keep jumping in the pond after the children he kept throwing? Or would they take a moment to stop and strategize and think of how to stop the evil man. I think most would do the latter. This isnt an abstract question. Children are dying right now. What are you going to do?
 
You can donate to the Student Trade Justice Campaign here. Please post your suggestions on worthy groups in the comments.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 18, 2009
 
Britain became the reigning world power by being one of the most protectionist countries on earth, expending enormous amounts of government money to promote local industries.
 
Certainly Britain had plenty of protectionist policies at the same time as growing rapidly. That doesnt quite prove causality, though in fact its not even clear to me that the correlation between trade barriers and growth (even just among early-stage countries) would be positive.
 
posted by improbable
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
Simply googling for [correlation between trade barriers and growth] finds that it is. See, e.g.: Trade openness and economic growth: contrary to the conventional view on the growth effects of trade barriers, our estimation results show that trade barriers are positively and, in most specifications, significantly associated with growth, especially for developing countries.
 
Obviously Im not going to be able to prove causality in a blog post on a different subject, but the evidence strikes me as convincing. I believe Ha-Joon Chang has done the most work on laying out the case.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
A hippie and a corporate security guard are fighting on the other side of the pond, near a group of children.  Children keep falling in, but you cant tell which man is pushing them in and which is trying to stop the other.
 
posted by Don Marti
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
Havent read the book, so maybe he addresses this. But can Peter Singer justify why he looks well dressed in his photos?
 
posted by tom s.
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
Hi Aaron,
It seems particularly presumptuous to assume that there is a simple answer for why poor countries dont develop, and that it is insufficient protectionism.  Im not making a judgement on the effectiveness on protectionism per se (indeed, I agree that it can be worthwhile), but there have been enough examples on both sides of the argument to make the case that it can potentially succeed either way  other factors like governance and cultural attitudes towards economics institutions (respect for property rights, etc) have a much greater impact than the tariffs they do or dont pay.
 
It may nicely fit the narrative of a demagogue like Naomi Klein to say that the WTO and IMF are the main impediments to global development, but I think reality has a different message.
 
posted by curious
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
I think the answer to this is:
 
Q. Are you living a simple life and giving most of your income to the poor?
 
A. Im not living as luxurious a life as I could afford to, but I admit that I indulge my own desires more than I should. I give about 25% of what I earn to NGOs, mostly to organizations helping the poor to live a better life.  I dont claim that this is as much as I should give.  Since I started giving, about thirty years ago, Ive gradually increased the amount I give, and Im continuing to do so.
 
Also, the practical exhortation he makes  giving around 10% to the poor  is pretty modest, even though the moral case suggests giving more.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
curious: Id love to see your evidence. While well never know perfectly what helps countries develop I think were morally bound to do the best we can. Ha-Joon Changs Bad Samaritans makes a convincing case that governance and cultural attitudes are effects, not causes  he shows that most of the countries that went through major development started with corrupt governments and lazy cultures.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
Hi Aaron,
 
I havent read changs book but Im highly skeptical of the claim that governance and cultural attitudes are effects not causes. A quick amazon full-text search indicates that he doesnt mention countries like botswana who managed the developmental challenge quite well largely owing to cultural factors.
 
Ill have to go back through my college notes to find some examples in africa, but free-market oriented countries that have developed well include some of the eastern bloc (even with the pain theyve felt in this recession, its clear theyre still better off). There are also numerous examples of closed-market economies (think Tanzania, Uganda, Zimbabwe) that have continued to fail  and not all of them are a result of a single atrocious leader along the lines of Idi Amin or Mugabe.
 
How much of Daron Acemoglus stuff have you read, by the by? Ive found his to be among the most enlightening material on development economics, and hes not particularly beholden to any ideology.
 
I do believe that trade policy matters, but at the saving-a-life level Im not convinced its the thing that is the most determining factor.
 
Certainly, as william goldman famoulsy said, nobody knows anything.
 
posted by curious
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
How does one save lives through culture or governance structure? Its moderately clear to me how to influence the WTO; what do I do on those other issues?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
Interesting post! Ive often thought about this in terms of supposedly earth-friendly international policies that curb emissions. Curbing the emissions of developing countries is like saying everyone can only earn $50,000 a year when some people already have $1m in assets and others have nothing - theyll never catch up.
 
As an aside, though, its interesting that Singer lived in a time and culture that couldnt possibly imagine the answer to the drowning child question to be No. Yet it sorta exists. There have been a large number of cases, and even studies, in the UK over the last decade where adults refuse to help distressed children due to fear of pedophilia (its so bad that theres not a single male under 25 working in a daycare center in the UK). I must admit, Id probably think twice too.
 
posted by Peter Cooper
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
Sorry if my reply was a bit snarky.
 
However I still dislike the way youve tangled up two things in this post: one is about under what conditions you have a moral obligation to act, the other is a claim that particular policies are having a particular effect. Understanding the the first point, about stopping evil men, doesnt tell you anything about the second one, about whether certain policies are evil. This is a separate judment, which must stand on its own merits. If youre not going to tackle [proving] causality in a blog post on a different subject then you should I think be careful not to imply that those whose views on this differ are somehow guilty of misunderstanding the moral lesson of the first part. I think thats what irked me.
 
Development is a really knotty question, and does not have a one-word solution like protectionism!. Im not claiming that protection of certain industries in certain circumstances cant be a good thing for a country, but I dont think that trade barriers are the main policies which bottom-billion countries lack.
 
If you wanted some unambiguously bad rich-country trade policies to cast as the evil man in a simple story, then perhaps the subsidies and barriers which prevent the poor world from exporting as much agricultural produce as it might would be a better choice. I dont think there is much serious dissent that such policies are bad for Africa, say.
 
Regards,
M
 
posted by improbable
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
I completely agree the moral and the factual question are separate; Im sorry if that didnt come thru. I think theres also a moral case to be made that its wrong for rich countries to try to force poor countries to change their internal government structures, as the free-traders do, irrespective of the impact of these policies on growth, but thats a separate piece.
 
If you have any that trade barriers are [not] the main policies which bottom-billion countries lack; Id love to see it.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
 people come up with all sorts of rationalizations for why they dont give (its not my responsibility, I do my fair share, foreign aid doesnt really do any good, etc.). In his recent book, The Life You Can Save, Singer sets about systematically debunking these arguments. 
 
Is foreign aid doesnt really do any good simply a rationalization that people come up with to justify their lifestyles?
 
Authors@Google: William Easterly
White Mans Burden
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o_H0g30YwQ8
 
If the money you give really turns out to be a waste (caused by, say, the lack of CIAO of aid agencies as mentioned in the Easterlys talk above), is telling people to spend (more of) their money on charity really a right thing?
 
posted by Stan
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
William Easterly is one of the people discussed in the book. Im not going to repeat the whole argument here (theres also a good debate between Easterly and Singer you can find online) but the gist of it is that Easterly never mentions private aid, the kind Singer is recommending, and that the public aid he does discuss usually isnt intended solely or even primarily to help the poor but instead to promote other policy goals. I lost a lot of respect for Easterly after hearing that.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
Also, I should be clear that Im asking for evidence on these things not because I want to prove people wrong, but because Im genuinely researching this stuff now and am interested in all the reading recommendations I can get.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
a good debate between Easterly and Singer you can find online
 
I googled singer easterly and found this WSJ article, written by Easterly:
 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB123621201818134757.html
 
Adding a different perspective would be a good thing :-)
 
posted by Stan
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
Singer tells a compelling story.  But I think I can tell another that is equally convincing.
 
If you ask people would you condemn a person as a monster if they did not send all their available spare money to save lives in the third world? most people would reply in the negative.  But ah ha!  If you ask the same people whether a person is a monster for not jumping in to save a child because it would ruin their expensive suit they reply in the positive!  Surely given their response in the first scenario the suit-preserver is not not a monster.
 
In other words, if we are going to take peoples instinctive reactions as bases for moral reasoning, doesnt it work just as well the other way around?
 
Or in other words, are these thought experiments a good method of reasoning?
 
What Singer really reveals is that our morality did not evolve in a global world, where we are connected to everybody on the planet.  It evolved in small communities of maybe 100 people at most, where everybody you met was part of the same tribe.  These moral instincts just dont work in the modern world.
 
posted by Tom Scrace
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
Sorry, that should be not a monster at the end of the second paragraph.
 
posted by Tom Scrace
 on August 18, 2009 #
 
Aaron,
 
The vast majority of economists tell us that protectionism is harmful. How can you be so confident that money is better spent on protectionism than on directly saving the life of a child? And why should I listen to your advice, when nearly all the experts contradict it? I find your arguments unconvincing.
 
posted by Gabriel McManus
 on August 19, 2009 #
 
Tom Scrace makes a good point about whether these moral lessons scale well. Intuition from small groups doesnt necessarily lead to a good strategy for organising millions of people. Its a little bit like those if there was a ticking time-bomb torture examples, where the gap between the toy model and the real world is wide enough that you simply cant copy conclusions from one to the other.
 
Reits wrong for rich countries to try to force poor countries to change: Isnt any attempt to help citizens of other countries going to fall foul of this? There isnt even really an option to leave them the hell alone, since we trade with them and this is already influenced by our internal policies. And should we not try to improve things for citizens of Zimbabwe & North Korea?
 
Certainly the gap is now wide enough that rich countries have some obligation to try to choose policies towards poor countries most likely to improve their lot, rather than just in self-interest. But this is defined according to our best current understanding, which is sadly rather vague.
 
Re the main policies which bottom-billion countries lack: certainly more barriers arent a unanimous recommendation of recent books on aid & development. I guess I had in mind Paul Collier when I wrote the sentence.
 
posted by improbable
 on August 19, 2009 #
 
I would like to point out that many western countries (including the United States) are still subsiding large parts of their economy (agriculture for instance), but at the same time are pressuring other countries to adopt free trade and no subsidies. That kind of free trade is pretty unfair.
 
The net result is that we flod them with our cheap subsidized products, killing their own local self-sustained economy and making it cheap for us to buy all their lands and natural resources. Then, later, we see an opportunity to rase the price for our products (say convert cereals to bio-fuels), and theyre left with no money to buy anything (so theyre cumulating debts), no economy and no more land to rebuild it (we own the land and have integrated it in our own economy).
 
How to fix this? These countries need to resist our free trade pressure and erect trade barriers as needed to bring back their economy to a self sustained state, take back the lands we buyed extorted and put it in the hands the locals, and stop repying those ridicoulus national debts due to us they accumuated over these years of totally unfair trade.
 
The irony is that western countries encourage foreign governements to give in their economy, and when they dont they are accused of being corrupted, socialists, communists, despots, etc. Our governements (not just the United States) often deploy significant financial resources to bring them out of power by funding friendly policical oposition or even sponsoring a coup.
 
Yes free trade benefits our economy, but only because were not really doing it and we let others do it.
 
A good read: Why is there rampant famine in the 21st century and how can it be eradicated? 
 
posted by Michel Fortin
 on August 19, 2009 #
 
I cant even begin to explain how disingenous calling the man throwing kids into the water economics.
 
Thanks to what you call economics, one billion people in China and India have come out of mind-numbingly crushing poverty in the last 20 years.
 
Of course, if you understood what youre talking about (youre a smart guy, just clueless when you talk about this subject), youd know that the answer isnt protectionism. But you continue ranting and raving.
 
posted by Gabriel Puliatti
 on August 19, 2009 #
 
That Easterly article is really weak. He admits Singer points to programs that do good for the poor, but says its irrelevant because other aid agencies are wasteful. How is that anything but a non sequitur?
 
On more minor notes, Singer no longer suggests people should give to UNICEF and his book has a whole section about Easterly (which isnt disclosed in the review) answering the question But why has so little changed, despite decades of effort and billions spent? Instead of responding to it, Easterly just repeats the question. Shameful.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 19, 2009 #
 
The Beautiful Tree: A Personal Journey Into How the Worlds Poorest People Are Educating Themselves. Apparently, if you let people into the free market of education, even the poorest get better education than whats offered by the state.
 
Tim Harford on Why Poor Countries are Poor
 
Mark Perry: The Power of the Market: 600 Million People in China Have Been Lifted Out of Poverty Since 1981
 
Growthology: The Facts of Growth (Not a Mystery)
 
If you talk to almost anyone who knows what hes talking about in matters of development, hell agree that protectionism isnt what you want
 
posted by Gabriel Puliatti
 on August 19, 2009 #
 
curious said:
 
A quick amazon full-text search indicates that he doesnt mention countries like botswana  who managed the developmental challenge quite well largely owing to cultural factors.
 
From Wikipedia:
 
Debswana, the largest diamond mining company operating in Botswana, is 50% owned by the government. Mineral industry provides about 40% of all government revenues.
 
I think any country that literally lands on a diamond mine tends to have a certain intrinsic advantage that cant be ruled out, regardless of its development policy.
 
posted by bostwana_guy
 on August 19, 2009 #
 
Presumably curious believes that they discovered the diamonds due to their superior culture. I think this goes to prove Changs point, which is how easy it is to pick out particular factors of a culture after the fact and claim theyre the reasons for success or failure. Every culture is a wild mix of traits.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 19, 2009 #
 
This is of course reasoning by false analogy.  An emotionally compelling story none the less.  I hope it helps some worthy causes.
 
posted by John F. Miller
 on August 20, 2009 #
 
Actually, bostwana_guy, which I am guessing is botswana_guy, generally a country that lands on a natural resource in Africa goes to hell because of it: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dutch_disease
 
So the Botswana example is actually a really interesting one.
 
posted by quinn
 on August 21, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 17, 2009
 
Title: Scenes 2
 
After a long delay, were finally allowed to board the plane. As we wait in line, the businessman in front of me takes out his phone and makes a call. Hi, honey, he says, apparently leaving a message. Were only boarding the plane just now, so Ill probably be about an hour late. See you then. He hangs up the phone and then dials again. Hi, honey, he says, in a similar voice. Were only boarding the plane just now, so Ill probably be an hour and forty minutes late. See you then.
 
A man paces his apartment in a robe. He lives on the penthouse suite of a modern residential building in an industrial section of Manhattan. He has the whole top floor; the elevator opens right into his apartment. I dont think hes left the place in days; for food, he orders delivery and pays at the elevator door. Can you get me some pot? he asks. Hes desperate for it. I give him a piece of paper with the number for a coke delivery service  anytime, anywhere. Do you think they do weed too? he asks. A copy of Infinite Jest lies unopened by his bed.
 
Theres a cafe across the street that has the worlds most perfect corn muffins. But they only seem to stock just one each day. Every day, I carefully watch the clock: if I go there too early, Im not particularly hungry; if I go there too late, I find them out of corn muffins and leave empty-handed. Finding the right minute is a constant struggle.
 
Today I show up and, as usual, theres just one left. One clerk is getting it for me (I dont even have to ask anymore; the clerks all know I always get just the corn muffin) while another is taking the order of the woman next to me. Ill have theoh, he got the last one, she says. She turns to me. You got the best muffin! She walks away empty-handed.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 17, 2009
 
Previously: Scenes 1. Again, these are all completely true.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 17, 2009 #
 
I missed your first post and was about to ask if you were experimenting with storytelling through vignettes here (related to your earlier post about writing).
 
I want to figure out why but I found the first scene here very easy to read and enjoyed it. The second one was harder to read and I didnt really get it. The third one I found hard to read and so I just scanned it. If this wasnt an experiment in telling a story through a vignette, though, these insights are probably next to pointless.. :)
 
posted by Peter Cooper
 on August 17, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 12, 2009
 
Title: Poverty Kills
 
Bangladesh, 1974. Food per person was at an all-time high  it was a peak year in rice output and availability. It was also a peak year for starvation. 100,000 people starved to death, their skin cracking and their tissues breaking down. They were unable even to focus their eyes as the world watched on TV. Another million and a half died from starvations secondary effects. Another half-a-million died after the famine was over because their bodies had been made so weak. There was plenty of food to feed them. They starved because they were too poor to afford it.
 
Poor people die because they cant get food, because they cant get shelter, because they cant get health care, because they cant get homes in places that arent polluted, because they cant get food without toxins, because they cant get time off to supervise their kids, because they cant spend money on safety, because they cant spend money on education, because they cant get a vacation from the stress thats literally eating away at their brain. We dont even know all the reasons poor people die. But we do know that they do.
 
Its not polite to talk about that. We talk about the poverty rate or the poverty level or the poverty gap, not kids catching on fire and adults wasting away. We talk about economic development and markets and education, not the millions who die each year coughing blood as tuberculosis takes over their body. (They dont die from tuberculosis. They die because they cant afford the vaccine.)
 
Eben Kenah wants to change that. His thesis, Poverty and the English Language [PDF], is the best thing Ive read in a very long while. Quite literally, its changed the way I look at whats important in the world. He argues that the right way to think about poverty isnt in terms of GDP or income or education or literacy, but in terms of death. That we should measure poverty by measuring who it kills. It is easier to believe that poverty causes people to wear old clothes, live in small houses, or forego owning a television than it is to admit that people on the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder often die early as a result, he writes.
 
A black man in Harlem is 4.11 times as likely to die in a given year as the average American male. A poor white in Detroit is twice as likely. Poor people are more likely to die than rich people, lower-class people than upper-class people, unemployed than employed, blacks than whites.
 
Mortality resolves a number of long-standing technical debates about the right way to measure poverty. In the US we calculate poverty by having experts at the Department of Agriculture figure out the cheapest products on sale in America that could meet minimal nutritional requirements. They add up how much they cost and multiply by three. People with less than that are defined as poor. Can the poor really follow that minimal diet in practice? How do you even decide what minimal nutritional requirements are? Why three? The answer is simple: just count deaths instead.
 
But thinking about things this way provokes broader, more fundamental questions, even broader than the issue of global poverty. It makes us ask: Why do people die? And how can we stop it?
 
The rich worry about this all the time. Vast sums are spent on their health care. Theres a whole industry in improving traffic safety. Billions of dollars are spent to remove minute amounts of chemicals from water.
 
But asking that broader question  why do people die?  provides a framework for all these other issues: health care, education, poverty, disease, crime, public services, stress, shelter, climate, mobility, famine, pesticides, fatty foods, toxins, pollution, daycare, quality of life. It all comes in corpses: clear, countable, comparable facts. Were all dead bodies in the end.
 
A ticker at the bottom of the TV news screen gives people up-to-the-minute information about how well the stock market is doing. Nobody tells us how many people are dying right now (107 people every minute, 5 of them in the US). When a major stock drops, we hear which and how much and why and how it fits into the bigger market picture. Nobody does the same for deaths, either individual or in outbreaks. Nobodys provided an overall look at why people are dying and how all our attempts to make the world a better place  from economic growth to clean water  are helping. Somebody should start.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 12, 2009
 
If we actually knew how many people died a day it would probably cause alot more people to exercise and eat healthier always being worried.
 
posted by nkog
 on August 12, 2009 #
 
It occurred to me a while back that you could use this approach to measuring purchasing power parity and inflation over time. Its difficult to measure inflation because the things that are available for sale and their relative prices very quite a bit over time. You cant buy a new Tiffany lamp today, and you couldnt buy penicillin in 1920 when the Tiffany lamp was new. You can buy meat with fewer hours of work today in the US than you could a century ago  but its feedlot meat, not grass-fed meat. And perhaps we should not consider ourselves all wealthier than Napoleon III merely because we drink out of aluminum cans that we discard with barely a thought, while he ate off of an aluminum plate, leaving the mere gold plates to his guests.
 
So it occurred to me that you could, in theory, estimate life-expectancies-at-birth for different parts of the income distribution for a given time period.  For any given society at any given time, the income boost required to boost your life expectancy from, say, 65 to 75 should be well-defined; and similarly from 75 to 85 (although thats probably a much larger amount of money).
 
That would give you a way to roughly compare marginal incomes in different societies and different times, and perhaps to calculate something of the real purchasing power of money in any given place.
 
In a society where poverty didnt kill anybody, this method would assign no value to money.
 
posted by Kragen Javier Sitaker
 on August 12, 2009 #
 
Id recommend Raj Patels Stuffed and Starved  to anyone how is interested in the intersections of food, poverty, and capital.
 
http://fora.tv/2008/05/16/Raj_Patel_Discusses_Stuffed_and_Starved#Raj_Patel_on_Indian_Farmer_Crisis
 
posted by Luis Garcia-Vega
 on August 25, 2009 #
 
According to the American CIAs World Factbook, all the money in the world, divided by all the people in the world, equals $10K.
 
According to Ethno-Socio-Biologist EO Wilson, the carrying cost to sustain one single human life pegs out at about roughly $5K per year:
 
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=000E5878-3E45-1CC6-B4A8809EC588EEDF&print=true Read more Read more
 
In other words, we already have 2x as much as we need to comfortably take care of everyone that is alive today.
 
The problem is
 
We wont.
 
posted by Nyc Labrets
 on August 25, 2009 #
 
A bunch of people seem to think the poor are stuck in a Malthusian trap  that giving them more resources will just cause them to have more kids until the resources are gone again. These people should read about the demographic transition: the only proven way to decrease birth rates is to decrease death rates, since if people think their kids are going to die they have more kids.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 25, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August 11, 2009
 
Title: Reading Samuel Bowles
 
How do you expect an advanced textbook on Microeconomics to begin? Probably not like this:
 
Like the overnight train that left me in an empty field some distance from the settlement, the process of economic development has for the most part bypassed the two hundred or so families that make up the village of Palanpur. They have remained poor, even by Indian standards: less than a third of the adults are literate, and most have endured the loss of a child to malnutrition or to illnesses that are long forgotten in other parts of the world. But for the occasional wristwatch, bicycle, or irrigation pump, Palanpur appears to be a timeless backwater, untouched by Indias cutting edge software industry and booming agricultural regions. Seeking to understand why, I approached a sharecropper and his three daughters weeding a small plot. The conversation eventually turned to the fact that Palanpur farmers sow their winter crops several weeks after the date at which yields would be maximized. The farmers do not doubt that earlier planting would give them larger harvests, but no one the farmer explained, is willing to be the first to plant, as the seeds on any lone plot would be quickly eaten by birds. I asked if a large group of farmers, perhaps relatives, had ever agreed to sow earlier, all planting on the same day to minimize losses. If we knew how to do that, he said, looking up from his hoe at me, we would not be poor.
 
Thats from Samuel Bowles unorthodox economics textbook, Microeconomics: Behavior, Institutions, and Evolution. We were talking about it over in the comments on Crooked Timber and one thing led to another and weve decided to start a reading group to go through it.
 
You can sign up here.
 
If youre still not convinced, check out this review:
 
all the relevant issues are presented in their complexity, nothing is swept under the carpet, and what makes this book in particular commendable is the way in which information from anthropology, psychology and the social sciences is weaven into the story. The contrast with the ridiculous assumptions and the unrealistic or simply false simplistic models of standard neoclassical textbooks (like for example that of Mankiw) is striking. [The difficulty] is mitigated somewhat by Bowles clear writing, and sometimes he also takes the trouble (which unfortunately few economists do) of specifically explaining what the mathematical formulas mean, for people who have difficulty with somewhat advanced equations and the like. In any case, he relies quite correctly more on empirical arguments regarding problems of the common, of evolution of institutions, the workings of altruism, prisoners dilemmas, and so on than on any kind of math (although these things can be expressed in math, often).
 
You can still sign up here.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 11, 2009
 
Im going to annoy you by saying I want a twitter hashtag. I seem to think its not really a reading group unless it has a hashtag too. #bowles?
 
posted by quinn
 on August 11, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August  6, 2009
 
Title: Writing a Book: Part Two (Structure)
 
Ive always wanted to be a great writer, but nobodys ever explained how. So I tried to figure out for myself. I reread my favorite books, I read just about everything by David Foster Wallace and Robert Caro, I read a lot of New Yorker articles, I got caught up on n+1. I read a lot of stuff out loud, to get a feel for the sound of the voice. (I performed all the brief interviews (including the powerful On His Deathbed) in Brief Interviews with Hideous Men  incredible fun; I can completely see why it made John Krasinski want to become an actor.) In fact, it got to the point where I couldnt resist reading things out loud  some writing just begged to be performed.
 
I read some writing guides, but none of them were very helpful. Virginia Tuftes Artful Sentences was by far the most interesting, but Im not sure it was much practical help. Ive had the best luck with just reading great writing and then taking a stab of writing something of my own.
 
I also tried to figure out how to structure the writing. I watched Ira Glass give his standard talk seven or eight different times, I read Mamets On Directing Film, I sat down with Malcolm Gladwells Outliers and tried to take it apart and figure out how it worked. For some reason, even though the basic ideas are really simple, theyve taken me a really really long time to understand. Its quite odd, really. I saw Ira Glass say the same thing 8 times, but only on the 7th time did I walk away going Ohh, thats what he means! And I keep having similar obvious epiphanies.
 
I think part of the problem is that I was around a lot of really bad storytellers as a kid. My Dad would tell a joke and it would take so long that I would be tearing my hair out with boredom halfway through. When it was over I would think, Wait, that was the joke? I can tell that joke in two lines. What did he need all those details for? And since then Ive basically been the person who tells jokes in two lines  omitting needless words, using only the barest description, and getting very impatient with people who run long (which was basically everyone, it seemed to me).
 
I dont know if Ive begun reading better writers or grown more patient with age, but Im beginning to question this approach. Being spare and interesting is better than being prolix and boring, Im still convinced, but theres a place for the seemingly-irrelevant detail. For one thing, what makes a story a story is the irrelevant detail. Ira Glass demonstrates this by quoting the opening of his show Cringe.
 
(You can listen to it on the site there  just click Full Episode on the left side. Its the first three minutes. Its much better listened to, but if you cant, heres a transcript:)
 
IRA: Joe worked at this office where, every now and then, the office manager would bring her nine-year-old to work. Good kid. Kind of tomboy-ish.
 
JOE: And she would just kind of help out around the office. She would pass mail out. And over the time that I was there she and I developed this reallythis kind of teasing relationship: she would come into my office and drop my mail off and stick her tongue at me and I would sort of fake chase her down the hallway or something and you know.
 
IRA: Thats sweet.
 
JOE: Yeah, yeah. She was an incredibly sweet kid.
 
[music (Elephant Walk) begins]
 
JOE: And so theres this day when, its early in the morning, Ive arrived at the office, and I go into the bathroom, and when I come out of the bathroom, I have my glasses in my shirt-pocket rather than on my head. And I look down this hallway and I see this small person walking towards me. And I then get down and start to crab-walk towards her. So I sort of go down on my haunches, and put my hands up as if theyre claws and kind of waddlewaddle towards her
 
At this point, Ira quips, nobody turns off the radio.
 
JOE: and as Im waddling towards her, I say, in this kind of creepy voice, Oh, no! I cant believe youre here today! And then, at that moment [laugh], as I say today, she comes into focus. And I realize, in fact, its not at all the young girl who I thought it was but in fact its one of our interns: a business intern, who is aaa midget.
 
[more music]
 
JOE: And so she comes into focus and I see her and Im horrified and I go bolt upright and I stand up and I say Oh, my god, Im terribly sorry, I thought you were somebody else. And I think to myself: who could she possibly think that someone else is?
 
IRA: [laughs]
 
JOE: [laughs] And I wondered at the time: Should I try to explain it to her? It seems to me like one of those situations where it only gets worse the more you try to explain it. The only thing I could do, in fact, was apologize and end all contact with her, forever, right there.
 
IRA: [laughs]
 
[music]
 
IRA: Joel says the women was utterly gracious. She introduces herself, she tries to put him at ease. (Apparently, if youre a midget, this sort of thing happens all the time.) But Joel says not only did he cringe when this happened, he cringes every time he tells this story. People cringe when they hear the story. And why? Seriously: why?
 
Yes, why? Not so much why do we cringe, but why do we listen so raptly? As Ira Glass is the first to point out, its kind of a boring story on its face. It takes him three minutes to tell, but I can tell it in two lines: A guy named Joe once mistook a midget for a nine-year-old. He cringes every time he tells the story. For the purposes of the show, thats all he needs to say  the purpose of the story is to set up a show about cringing, and just the idea of mistaking a midget for a nine-year-old is pretty cringeworthy. But he tells the story at length: except for the very end, he doesnt appear to try to summarize it at all.
 
And yet, not only do people not get bored  this is apparently what keeps them from getting bored. (Imagine how quickly people would tune out a show of two-sentence stories. Personally, I dont have to imagine  I see how bored they look when I tell mine. Which, of course, only makes me rush to tell them faster.) Glass argues that humans are somehow hardwired for stories. Once they get started, we have to hear what happened next. One thing happens, and then another thing, and then another thing, he says. Its got its own momentum  its like a train leaving the station.
 
I think Ira is being too modest. Hes an incredibly gifted storyteller; obviously one of the eras greatest (his show is the #1 podcast on iTunes). What looks like a simple recording of someone telling a story is the result of a thousand different questions and edits and adjustments. Theres a lifetime of experience behind every pause, every lilt of his cadence. To keep listeners hooked on a story is a very difficult skill.
 
But what I didnt realize was that its also a necessary one. Stories that go by too fast may not be as annoying as stories that are too slow, but theyre still flawed. Im too insecure to think my storytelling could possibly hold the listeners attention, so I rush through the story, hoping to tell them all the key facts before they get bored and wander off. But its a self-fulfilling prophecy: if you seem uninterested in your story, why should your listener be? If youre going to tell a story, you need to bite the bullet and be a storyteller.
 
The trick is realizing that the apparently-irrelevant details arent actually irrelevant. Look again at my transcript of Joes story. Theres only one thing I see in it that could be cut out: that its early in the morning. Incredibly, every other line in that three-minute story serves an important purpose.
 
Picking a sentence at random, She was an incredibly sweet kid. is necessary because Iras comment Thats sweet. sounds odd by itself, it needs a response. (Iras comment is necessary to make sure you see the chasing-down-the-hallway in the right emotional tone. (That scene, in turn, is necessary to explain the kind of relationship he and the girl had, and so on.)) A three minute story, and theres hardly a clause you can cut.
 
Thats the first rule of storytelling: a story needs to be interesting in its own right. But the second is equally important: the audience needs a reason to care. I think part of the reason were wired to follow stories is because a story carries an implied promise: theres going to be something good at the end of this.
 
The way Ira puts it is that there are two tools in storytelling: action, and reflection. Iras shows (like Gladwells articles) open with action. But the action leads immediately to reflection: look at the story above, theres not even a pause between the ending of the story and Ira asking why it is that we cringe. Iras not just telling the story because its entertaining, hes telling it because it makes us cringe and he wants us to think about that feeling.
 
He goes on to investigate that feeling  to explain what we can learn from the story. And here again its important to slow down. Theres a tendency to think that stories speak for themselves. First, because theres some artistic nobility in this: explaining what a story means is being didactic and preachy, its keeping your readers from thinking for themselves, it means your work isnt really art. Second, it often seems unnecessary: youve spent hours  days, weeks, months, years  thinking about your story. It seems obvious to you what it means. Maybe you can add a sentence spelling it out for the slow ones, but isnt that enough?
 
Its not, of course. Your head is full of evidence, examples, models, implications  all of which your readers arent just going to magically intuit. You need to tell them.
 
Again, I think I was betrayed by bad writing in my youth. I read a bunch of popular books that were just dreadful. I didnt know that these books werent actually meant for reading. Turns out, you get paid about the same amount for writing a truly great magazine article as you do for a mediocre one and only get a little more attention for the former. So if you write a really good magazine article, the only way to get rewarded is to turn it into a book.
 
The problem is that even the longest magazine articles dont make for more 30 pages and you cant really publish a book that short. So you write a couple hundred pages of filler. And, in most cases, that only detracts from your great article by watering it down. You basically just end up repeating yourself a lot in different words. As a child, I couldnt stand books like that and vowed never to write one.
 
But again I went too far. Its true, you dont need to give three examples of everything you say, but you cant simply give no examples either. Im still trying to figure out where the right balance is.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August  6, 2009
 
If you havent read Stephen Kings On Writing, you should check it out.
 
http://www.amazon.com/Writing-Stephen-King/dp/0743455967
 
posted by Jim Gilliam
 on August  7, 2009 #
 
Well if it helps, this is the first thing/article/whatever Ive read all day without scanning and jumping. So youre doing something right, because my attention is hard to keep. Indeed, youve pulled off the Ira Glass trick right here.
 
posted by Peter Cooper
 on August  7, 2009 #
 
First of all, well done!
I am struggling with the same problem: How to tell a remarkable story in an interesting way. My current solution: I try to get in a child-like mind-state and see if the story works. I gave up to analyze them with my adult-mind.
 
posted by Oliver Pospisil
 on August  7, 2009 #
 
Impressive insight!
 
posted by Susan
 on August  7, 2009 #
 
For a lot of people all this youre saying is (intituitively) obvious. Healthy amount of redundant detail in a story is essentially what makes it interesting - and a really good storyteller can make you stop and listen with interest to just about anything.
 
However, obviously, for a lot of people this isnt obvious at all.
 
What fascinates me is to see how your super rational, analytical mind managed to discover and understand all this (jump from one group to the other) - and then recount the process in an interesting way.
 
Great stuff!
 
posted by Mr
 on August  7, 2009 #
 
While putting together an anthology of essays on fiction writing, I came across an old, out of print book deep in the hollows of the New York Public Library, called Fundamentals of Fiction Writing by Arthur Sullivant Hoffman. Although I couldnt put any of it into my book, I found it to be the most useful, concise, and to-the-point writers guide I have ever read. Amazingly, its available in full through Google Books (http://tinyurl.com/mtvpq8)
 
Or you could just buy my book, Great Writers on the Art of Fiction edit by James Daley :)
 
posted by James
 on August  7, 2009 #
 
I think theres a difference between hearing the information, i.e., understanding the story, and experiencing the story.  For instance, theres an added pause in the audio (edited in) after Joe talks about how he plays these silly games with this girl.  This gives the listener a chance to digest the information, and then a little extra time for the listener to think: where is this going?  And its not hard to see that its going someplace in some way embarrassing.  How, we dont know.  But the listener is prepared, the listener can place themselves in the right state of mind to hear the next part of the story.  Being interesting is motivation to really hear the next part, but even when motivated you sometimes need a little time just to get ready.
 
Lately Ive been telling stories to little kids, which is a weird and not entirely analogous experience.  But its all about this lead-up.  I think because they have a much harder time understanding the stories, and they dont know the standard queues about where the story is going.  So you need to lay it on thick.  When they know where the story is going, thats best of all.  Youre bringing them along.  You can be much more subtle when you are bringing along an adult, but I think we appreciate that just as much as the child, we want to kind of know what the next element of the story is before you tell it.
 
posted by Ian Bicking
 on August  7, 2009 #
 
http://badgods.com/brevity.html
 
This comic echoes a lot of what you said above on finding the right balance between compression and redundancy.
 
posted by Peter Harkins
 on August 14, 2009 #
 
Have you come across the Color/Advance exercise for storytelling?
 
Breaking the eggs has a pretty good explanation of how it works:
 
http://storytelling.blogspot.com/2009/07/process-color-and-advance.html
 
posted by Payo
 on August 16, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: August  2, 2009
 
Title: Life in a World of Pervasive Immorality: The Ethics of Being Alive
 
I used to think I was a pretty good person. I certainly didnt kill people, for example. But then Peter Singer pointed out that animals were conscious and that eating them led them to be killed and that wasnt all that morally different from killing people after all. So I became a vegetarian.
 
Again I thought I was a pretty good person. But then Arianna Huffington told me that by driving in a car I was pouring toxic fumes into the air and sending money to foreign dictatorships. So I got a bike instead.
 
But then I realized that my bike seat was sewn by children in foreign sweatshops while its tubing was made by mining metals through ripping up the earth. Indeed, any money I spent was likely to go to oppressing people or destroying the planet in one way or another. And if I happen to make money some of it goes to the government which spends it blowing people up in Afghanistan or Iraq.
 
I thought about just living off of stuff I found in dumpsters, like some friends. That way I wouldnt be responsible for encouraging its production. But then I realized that some people buy the things they cant find in dumpsters; if I got to the dumpster and took something before they did, they might buy it instead.
 
The solution seemed clear: Id have to go off-the-grid and live in a cave, gathering nuts and berries. Id still probably be exhaling CO2 and using some of the products in the Earth, but probably only in levels that were sustainable.
 
Perhaps you disagree with me that its morally wrong to kill animals or blow up people in Afghanistan. But surely you can imagine that it might be, or at least that someone could think it is. And I think its similarly clear that eating a hamburger or paying taxes contributes  in a very small way; perhaps only has the possibility of contributing  to those things.
 
Even if you dont, everyday life has a million ways that are more direct. Personally, I think its wrong that I get to sit at a table and gaily devour while someone else delivers more food to my table and a third person slaves over a stove. Every time I order food, I make them do more carrying and slaving. (Perhaps they get some money in return, but surely theyd prefer it if I just gave them the money.) Again, you may not think this wrong but I hope you can admit the possibility. And its obviously my fault.
 
Off in the cave, I thought I was safe. But then I read Peter Singers latest book. He points out that for as little as a quarter, you can save a childs life. (E.g. for 27 cents you can buy the oral rehydration salts that will save a child from fatal diarrhea.) Perhaps I was killing people after all.
 
I couldnt morally make money, for the reasons described above. (Although maybe its worth helping fund the bombing of children in Afghanistan in order to help save children in Mozambique.) But instead of living in a cave, I could go to Africa and volunteer my time.
 
Of course, if I do that there are a thousand other things Im not doing. How can I decide which action I take will save the most lives? Even if I take the time to figuring out, thats time Im spending on myself instead of saving lives.
 
It seems impossible to be moral. Not only does everything I do cause great harm, but so does everything I dont do. Standard accounts of morality assume that its difficult, but attainable: dont lie, dont cheat, dont steal. But it seems like living a moral life isnt even possible.
 
But if morality is unattainable, surely I should simply do the best I can. (Ought implies can, after all.) Peter Singer is a good utilitarian, so perhaps I should try to maximize the good I do for the world. But even this seems like an incredibly onerous standard. I should not just stop eating meat, but animal products altogether. I shouldnt just stop buying factory-farmed food, I should stop buying altogether. I should take things out of dumpsters other people are unlikely to be searching. I should live someplace where others wont be disturbed.
 
Of course all this worrying and stress is preventing me from doing any good in the world. I can hardly take a step without thinking about who it hurts. So I decide not to worry about the bad I might be doing and just focus on doing good  screw the rules.
 
But this doesnt just apply to the rules inspired by Peter Singer. Waiting in line at the checkout counter is keeping me from my life-saving work (and paying will cost me life-saving money)  better just to shoplift. Lying, cheating, any crime can be similarly justified.
 
It seems paradoxical: in my quest to do good Ive justified doing all sorts of bad. Nobody questioned me when I went out and ordered a juicy steak, but when I shoplift soda everyone recoils. Is there sense in following their rules or are they just another example of the worlds pervasive immorality? Have any philosophers considered this question?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August  2, 2009
 
It seems you define morality by what other tell you are doing wrong. Perhaps you should stop reading books about what tells you are doing wrong and make up your own book about what you are doing right.
 
posted by Senthil Nambi
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
morality, like all other ideas, is made up. its a nice idea, but its just an idea; its not real.
 
posted by 
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
How does your long post not boil down to I cant be perfectly moral, so I wont bother?
 
Also, as you suspected, philosophers have considered this issue at length: http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consequentialism/#ConWhoLimDemMor
 
posted by gwern
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
It seems to this inexpert reader that you are finding your way toward the principles 
of <a href=http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jainism
 
To me, though, living a life attempting absolute least harm is a memetic trap that can only result in both failure to avoid harm and failure to maximize general benefit; and that any such effort is necessarily flawed due to the general lack of perspective on what harm and benefit really are.
 
Here is an example of a man who lives without money, literally in a cave.  Does he live a more moral life than yourself?  Who can provide a definition by which we can judge?
 
Kevin Kelly said of science, (summarized by Stephen Brand), Our moral obligation is to generate possibilities, to discover the infinite ways, however complex and high-dimension, to play the infinite game.
 
Perhaps you should consider what your unique skills, knowledge, drive, and ideas can accomplish that you think would best improve existence, and then work toward those things.  Rather than focusing on harm done, which, from the viewpoint espoused in your article, is inevitable, consider that you might instead create a way to allow for (what many would consider) better quality of life.  Depending on your viewpoint, of course, examples of such creations might include cheap fusion power, economical air pollution scrubbers, Mdecins Sans Frontires, cancer cures, Amnesty International, genetic improvements, climate change stabilization, diversification of Earth life outside our world, human extinction (perhaps!), or maximization of reproduction of your personal gametes.
 
Best of luck, iff your ideas and goals are compatible with mine.  And if not, well, I can either do better, or live with the results, or die; isnt that the way nature works?
 
posted by Grego
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
Youre problem is a particularly obnoxious definition of morality. Morality is not doing good, morality is concerned with human choosing and deciding.
 
Its impossible to decide on good and bad because what is good for you is bad for me and vice versa. In that sense both doing good and doing bad is moral behavior because it involves making choices and decisions.
 
The only way we can come close to as many people as possible doing good is radical transparency. We need to make sure that people can take into account as much as possible when they make choices but thats about as far as we can go. The other alternative is to disallow people from making choices and choose for them (communism tried that.)
 
posted by Steven Devijver
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
Anything you do has endless consequences.
 
For example, maybe you push someone out of the way of being killed by a bus.  He goes on to marry a gal and have kids, making some other suitor unhappy, who then dies alone.  If you dont save him, the other suitor marries her, and has kids.  Either way you are killing off future people, because only one set of kids will exist (and exponential descendants from there).
 
However, keep in mind that even if all humans committed seppuku immediately, suffering would not end.
 
The total amount of suffering per year in the natural world is beyond all decent contemplation. During the minute that it takes me to compose this sentence, thousands of animals are being eaten alive, many others are running for their lives, whimpering with fear, others are slowly being devoured from within by rasping parasites, thousands of all kinds are dying of starvation, thirst, and disease. It must be so. If there ever is a time of plenty, this very fact will automatically lead to an increase in the population until the natural state of starvation and misery is restored. In a universe of electrons and selfish genes, blind physical forces and genetic replication, some people are going to get hurt, other people are going to get lucky, and you wont find any rhyme or reason in it, nor any justice. The universe that we observe has precisely the properties we should expect if there is, at bottom, no design, no purpose, no evil, no good, nothing but pitiless indifference.
 
 Richard Dawkins, Gods Utility Function, published in Scientific American (November, 1995), p. 85
 
The root of the problem is probably existence itself, in a Universe with this particular fine-tuning.  One can conceive that there could be a different set of parameters that did not lead to a Darwinian struggle with incomprehensible suffering.
 
What to do about it?  Trying to fit in with Nature is useless  not rocking the boat means being an obedient little phenotype and only propagating information slowly by genetic recombination, and then dying and letting chance decide if your offspring are any better off, which is obviously too slow a method to be useful to anyone alive now.
 
One solution is private virtual universes  like the Matrix, except everyone else is an AI, and its programmed to present you with a paradise.  Every conscious being would have one, ending competition over limited resources, as every being would be presented with as many resources as that being could comprehend.  AIs a million times smarter than humans would figure out how to hook up all the other non-human sentient beings and what their particular paradises would be.  AIs would be better company than any real people, but programmed in such a way that they did not suffer.
 
Which also suggests another solution  hacking our brains/genome to remove the ability to suffer.  This may be safer, as AIs that could give us endless pleasure could also torture us until the end of the Universe, and possibly longer than that, if they figure out space-time better than us with their incomprehensibly advanced minds.
 
posted by 
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
Nobody questioned me when I went out and ordered a juicy steak, but when I shoplift 
 
Trouble for me is, that when you use a moral vocabulary, it always presupposes some sort of shared social order. Thus an appeal to moral principles against a practice, (in)action,  is always an appeal within the limits of that form of society.
 
For instance, your questions about ripping up the earth, what can I do, juicy steak  shoplift,  presuppose a lot of shared principles & practices between you and those around you. Eg. liberal-individualist relation to the social, a natural state of the world, private-property relations, 
 
I dont think you or me as an individual can rationally evaluate all those presuppositions and arrive at a definite set of rules. And when you do, I doubt if you have found an absolute point, outside the principles and practices of our current society.
 
I therefore always feel a bit uneasy about pure moral arguments for/against certain (in)actions. They have a superficial, individualistic, fragmented and relativistic ring to them.
 
Personally, Im not quite sure what else. Something I am exploring are theories (and practices) where a forceful (Marxist-inspired) critique of our social system is combined with a normative theory (for individual comportment). Eg. the work of Alisdair MacIntyre or Alex Callinicos (cf. combining Rawl & Marxism in Resources of Critique).
 
posted by mhermans
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
Well, you could stop thinking too much so you get two benefits:
 
+You consume less power trying to solve something impossible, so you will need less to eat.
+You will be happier.
 
I tried to eat only vegetables, eggs and so. Not a good idea. I felt myself without energy all day. Now I feel good eating meat and fish. I was designed this way, so no regrets(imagine a tiger feeling ashamed for needing meat for survival).
 
I meet a man on Galicia(north of Spain) that lived without money on a cave(I thing he continue doing so in La Corua). I didnt liked this way of living for me.More than a decision I think this was escaping from other issues.
 
I think you dont know anything about people in third world countries do you?. You should go there, not for you helping them, but for THEM HELPING YOU.
 
Stop letting others to decide what you should think and think by yourself. Have your personal experience, not others one.
 
I have been in Africa(Guinea) with a family that didnt have money, but it had a FAMILY.(7 brothers, with parents, grandparents, and grandgrandparents. Believe it or not, they are way happier than any american family could be(so much people that are ALONE watching TV). They dont work every day as machines and when they feel something, they say it. Their family was a solid entity. American people cant understand it living in America, you need to live there by yourself to understand.
 
posted by Jose
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
You might want to read Yvon Chouinards book or watch videos at youtube ( http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NVfy2T0rzMc ) and get some hints about use of your time to help the planet..
 
posted by Kishore Balakrishnan
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
Many of the choices we make are not made because they are moral, but because they are easier. As Goffman and other microsociologists demonstrate custom and mores solve important coordination problems that enable routine interactions. This doesnt mean that conformance is always desirable, but as Richard Hamming points out, it is often often a very poor use of a human life to constantly be fighting them:

Many a second-rate fellow gets caught up in some little twitting of the system, and carries it through to warfare. He expends his energy in a foolish project. Now you are going to tell me that somebody has to change the system. I agree; somebodys has to. Which do you want to be? The person who changes the system or the person who does first-class science? Which person is it that you want to be? Be clear, when you fight the system and struggle with it, what you are doing, how far to go out of amusement, and how much to waste your effort fighting the system. My advice is to let somebody else do it and you get on with becoming a first-class scientist. Very few of you have the ability to both reform the system and become a first-class scientist.

http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/YouAndYourResearch.html
 
This does not mean that one should ignore the effects of your life upon the world, but I think it does mean that one should give up on the idea of innocence of intention, and instead turn to an ethic of responsibility. Understanding and accepting the intended and unintended consequences of your actions, and letting the balance guide your actions. Webers Politics as a Vocation is invaluable for me:
 
http://www.ne.jp/asahi/moriyuki/abukuma/weber/lecture/politics_vocation.html
 
posted by flunchg
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
It seems impossible to be moral. Not only does everything I do cause great harm, but so does everything I dont do. Standard accounts of morality assume that its difficult, but attainable: dont lie, dont cheat, dont steal. But it seems like living a moral life isnt even possible.
 
This is not quite true. Everything that you do may contribute to great harm, but in many of the examples you cite, that contribution is so negligible as to be statistically indistinguishable from no impact. Your individual choice to drive a car or not will have any impact whatsoever on the global configuration of energy use. Certainly, the aggregate of many individual choices matter, but if you want to change the world, changing yourself is often the least decisive point to intervene.
 
posted by flunchg
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
All living things are caught in a web of suffering. Could this be due to the possibility that life itself is destructive?
 
You seem to be thinking about what you are supposed to do and doing what you think you are supposed to do, all in order to fulfill what? A concept?
 
You are wasting the most important resource that you have to contribute to the ecosystem. Just perform your role. When done, rest.
 
posted by Jamie Pitts
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
I think these are valuable questions to be asking. Globalized capitalism questions the basis of our morality. We assume that there is some sort of right choice to make, and capitalism does offer choices, including the choice of non-participation. So it seems like we ought to be able to satisfy morality somehow here, and yet we cannot.
 
I am not sure of this myself, but I think the primary error here is to compare what one individual should do versus what a giant seething organism such as the global economy is doing. The moral sense that does well to establish reciprocity at a tribal level (you shouldnt steal soda) doesnt have any effective response to such gigantic systems. The fact that you are suffering information overload just trying to live morally is a symptom.
 
Rather than put all the onus on yourself to live perfectly as an individual when all the choices are wrong, perhaps the most moral thing is to help organize society better. Then you can hope that, over time, more people down the road will be able to live more moral lives. So rather than look for moral blamelessness in yourself today, look to help morally perfect your society over decades or even centuries.
 
Maybe I can encapsulate it this way  I really like Coke, although I do know that buying it probably contributes to oppression somewhere. So maybe I shouldnt buy it. But do I really want a world free of Coke? No, I really want a world where buying Coke wasnt so problematic. So I should be working to fix that. To rewire the way society and capitalism function so the supermarket doesnt contain horrors on every shelf.
 
In this formulation, we fix globalized harms through persuasion and better information systems, which is a felicitous combination for someone like yourself.
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
Ive thought about these issues for years, to the point of mild clinical depression. No easy answers, but here are three pointers Ive found helpful:
 
a) Its all but impossible to live as a human being without causing some suffering to other beings, so accept it.
 
b) In many ways you are part of nature, with all that entails, but in other ways you are above and beyond it. It is this conflict that causes existential angst - c.f. Erich Fromm.
 
c) The really hard question is whether you want to have children, who will themselves suffer (at least to some extent), and cause suffering in others.
 
My bottom line after a lot of soul searching: Dont consider yourself as an abstract being separate from nature, because youll never come to terms with the consequences of your natural needs. Instead consider yourself as an advanced mammal, accept your natural needs and their consequences, and feel good about the fact that you have placed moral limits on what youre willing to do in order to pursue your desires.
 
Or to put it another way: dont criticize yourself for doing things that you wouldnt criticize friends or strangers for. In your core youre no better than anyone else, and why should you be?
 
Dave
 
posted by Dave Green
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
How about being a billionaire philanthropist? As many people know, Warren Buffet, made billions and donated it to the Bill & Melinda Gates foundation. He drives a Buick and lives in the same small apartment he did when he wasnt nearly as wealthy.
 
His Buick pollutes. He probably consumes/uses goods manufactured by children in another country. He has paid a huge amount of taxes, some of which went to good, some of which want to Iraq.
 
So, he does some bad, but hes done faaar more good (or will, when his money is spent on public health in 3rd world countries).
 
If your standard for morality is amount_bad=0, amount_good>0, then youre in trouble. If your standard for morality is amount_good-amount_bad>0 (which I would argue is the utilitarian standard), then people like Buffet are extremely moral.
 
To do good while doing no bad at all seems infeasible as far as I can see. Minimizing the bad you do as a moral directive in its own right seems appropriate, but not at the expense of living in a cave instead of being productive and doing a huge amount of good. We have to shift bad on to some people in order to do a greater amount of good to others.
 
posted by Ted S
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
I can admit the possibility that meat-eating, foreign wars, and careless pollution contribute to net evil and suffering.
 
But your restaurant example is out-to-lunch.
 
Paying an agreed price for food preparation and service is a net good for all involved, an impressively moral act of cooperation expanding the possibility frontier for the participants. The cook no more slaves over a stove than you slaved over whatever earned you the money to pay the bill.
 
If you or she were not engaged in your respective highest callings when trading services for money, at least you were setting the foundation for the questions about higher values to be asked. Society needed a lot of specialization before it had written language, much less philosophy or blogging.
 
posted by Gordon Mohr
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
I just try to do more good than harm.
 
posted by Jim Gilliam
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
Unlike some, I actually think you are spot on. You arent that good of a person. Nor am I, for that matter. In fact, Id go even further: we are a lot worse than even what youve mentioned. I, for instance, cannot live up to the standard of behavior that I set up for other people. At the very least, that seems like it ought to be attainablebut I find it impossible, whether in my actions or in the thoughts that I sometimes try desperately to control.
 
Ive had to face it: I am immoral.
 
And, frankly, the more I try be good, the less good I discover I am. In and of itself, that is deeply disturbing and depressing. Ive found only one solution that is willing to tackle this problem to my satisfaction: most either tell me that I have a poor definition of morality, or that it doesnt matter, or (worse yet) that I need to work harder.
 
You might try reading The Concept of Morality in the Philosophy of Jonathan Edwardsthere seem to be some similarities in your strictness and Edwards.
 
Again, I think your analysis of the human condition is extremely correct: the question now is how you deal with the situation: ignoring it? working harder? or trying to find another rational solution?
 
posted by David Alan Hjelle
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
Youre caught in the classic logical fallacy of the false dilemma. Your entire article is almost a disproof of your thesis by reductio ad absurdum.
 
Also, youre confusing morality with ethics
 
Just because you cant behave entirely ethically doesnt mean you cant act more ethically.
 
Also, you should look at different ethical frameworks. Consequentialism isnt the only way to calculate your ethical load. Deontology has perhaps a less iteratively complex way of looking at things, and virtue ethics allows you to take a more humanistic perspective on things.
 
Bottom line is, youre struggling with concepts that are well addressed in the early parts of a philosophical education. If they bother you, go take some community college classes and stop making an ass of yourself on the internet.
 
posted by J Giles
 on August  2, 2009 #
 
I had the same point of view at one point (I even got it from the same person - I read an article by Singer, then a book by Unger, who writes about similar topics). However, now I think this view rests on a misunderstanding of the world.
 
The idea that my choice to buy from The Gap leads to the exploitation of children, assumes that I have far more control over the system than I actually do. Not in the sense that Im just one person. But even if no one wanted exploitation, it would still happen.
 
More precisely, my choice to buy from The Gap is connected to exploitation; but my choice not to buy from the gap would also be connected to exploitation. The system is formally composed of individual actions, but the outcome of those actions is in many ways predetermined.
 
Consider the morality of a totalitarian state. Just to survive, one needs to compromise with the state - one needs to objectively support some of its goals, work within it to some degree. A moral person will stay apart from it as much as possible, think carefully about the compromises, and work against the state when given the chance. But there is no sensible idea that a pointless suicidal attack against the state is the only moral choice.
 
Why do we feel differently about the capitalist system? I do not want exploitation; I do not agree with it; and yet I have to work within a system which relies on it. The reason we see a difference is because the totalitarian state seems external or imposed, while the consequences of liberal capitalism seem to be our choice.
 
This is the great problem with trying to overthrow liberal capitalism: people see the problems it brings; and instead of feeling outraged and trapped, they feel guilty and forlorn.
 
So that is my solution. Compromise with the system, but be aware of what I am compromising. And at the same time, work to overthrow it.
 
You might like to read Zizek (e.g., A Plea for Leninist Intolerance).
 
posted by Jason P
 on August  3, 2009 #
 
After a discussion of ice cream, exploitation, meat, fireflies, and having to go home in the spooky dark night on an unlit trail, I leaned very close to my young childs ear and said the sooner you understand, really understand, that life isnt fair, the better things will be.
 
Perhaps I should say it this way as well- unfairness is in the very nature of the quality of life, perhaps as someone noted, the quality of existence. The Buddhists and the Taoists handle this stuff pretty well. Somewhat unsatisfyingly to the purveyors of the general good, a lot of it comes back to freedom and happiness born from within- spiritual stuff, if not precisely religious.
 
These questions become easier when you accept life on its own terms.
 
As for the restaurant example, this you can test. Just ask them, and offer them the money a few times, no strings attached. Fair warning though: you run the risk of hurting their feelings and damage their sense of worth and mastery.
 
One more thing, just to make it even more complex. If you are worried about the happiness and quality of life of any and all creatures, isnt it hypocritical to suffer, and thereby add to the suffering of the world?
 
posted by 
 on August  3, 2009 #
 
I shall refrain from making negative comments designed only to inflate my ego as some of your other readers have shamelessly done.  I understand what you are experiencing and I myself have been struggling with finding a lifestyle that I can live with.  Just try your best.  Its all one can really do.  Laughing helps.
 
posted by adam
 on August  3, 2009 #
 
How does your long post not boil down to I cant be perfectly moral, so I wont bother?
 
No, its grappling with the practical question of how to maximize morality and arguing its far, far harder than is generally realized.
 
Far harder than realized? If youve read Singer you know that even an extreme utilitarian like him doesnt, nor expects others to, impoverish himself for the sake of Africans.
 
And far harder compared to what? Compared to a theological system like Calvinism, where one is eternally damned to hellfire or bound for heaven, where trying to live a moral life is a metaphysical impossibility? Or compared to Christian sects in general, where an invisible undetectable taint upon our souls descended from the first mud-man twists and perverts the efforts of every human (except Jesus) to be moral?
 
Compared to alternative systems, consequentialist ethics are pretty refreshingly doable.
 
Also, as you suspected, philosophers have considered this issue at length: http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consequentialism/#ConWhoLimDemMor
 
Singer and Unger dont seem to even scratch the surface of the problem. Even someone who donated all their money to charity would still be causing a great deal of presumably-avoidable harm.
 
Perhaps. I dont really see why you keep insisting on perfection; nothing I have ever done is, nor ever will be, perfect. If I am a little more moral today than I was yesterday, that is enough for me.
 
It seems paradoxical: in my quest to do good Ive justified doing all sorts of bad. Nobody questioned me when I went out and ordered a juicy steak, but when I shoplift soda everyone recoils. Is there sense in following their rules or are they just another example of the worlds pervasive immorality? Have any philosophers considered this question?
 
This is the sort of thing that irritates people - youre asking all sorts of basic philosophical questions, but without having really read the literature (Im surprised you havent trotted out the old chestnut about how utilitarianism demands that we cut up one patient to save 8 others) or carefully considered things.
 
First of all, you assume that steaks are bad. Why? The cow would not have been born if there was not projected demand by someone for its flesh; is it worse off for having living several years and then butchered? Would it have preferred to have never existed? Its entirely possible that ordering steak, and supporting the meat industry, is better than not ordering steak.
 
Second, youre assuming some of your conclusion. Its perfectly possible to do foreseeable harm and also maximize your utility. All you need is a utility function that values yourself more highly than other people (theres a whole universe of utility functions and approaches, and you seem to think theres just some simplistic egalitarian additive approach). Well, why not? Demonstrably, just about everyone acts as if they have such a function. Its not an obviously wrong thing to do; why should I value everyone equally with myself? Clearly not everyone is of equal value.
 
posted by gwern
 on August  3, 2009 #
 
Ought implies can.
 
posted by James
 on August  3, 2009 #
 
You arent making your tin (aluminum) foil hats out of domestic aluminum foil are you?  Reynolds Aluminum has been owned by the Asian Oligarchs since it was bought up by Alcoa and the once bio-sympathetic reflective grating properties of aluminum have been turned into the inversely purposed medium of broadcasting brainwave activity.  This is virtually impossible to prove since most tests like electro-spectra graph which requires a sample to be incinerated, turning it back into basic aluminum can never reverse engineer the lattice structure of ionic bonds that allows broadcasting to occur.
 
Just a little conspiracy humor since this post says above all other nuanced inferences (virtually screams) I could use a little cheering up.
 
Site search Aarons blog for the word philosophy (philosophy site:www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ entered in Google search): 71 hits.  To me that sparse number doesnt indicate a deference from philosophy but rather reverence for the concept.
 
Hand to everything I ever held to be the truth: there is a book named One Stalk Revolution and the authors last name is Fukoto.  I cant find it anywhere.  My personal copy is long gone and no search of the Library of Congress returns anything.  It is a book about the philosophy of living as simple of life as possible.  In that it mentions that the author lives in a communal situation, it promotes communal living.  In an interesting concession to the challenge of completely self sustained existence, the commune obtains its vegetable oil from outside sources.
 
Some more than less than more or less advice would be: mellow out, listen to King Crimsons The Nightwatch off of Starless and Bible Black and get your own good works in to perspective.
 
Oh yeah, this post and your last have the interlocutory devices of narcissism.  Hot Chicks ie; the narcissistic among us and you (possibly just feigning) struggling to justify your existence in the world.  Hah! Thats rich!  Here, let me appeal to your narcissism- An interview on my own obscure blog:  An interview with Aaron Swartz: The only person ever whos research was mentioned on CSPAN who is currently alive to live in a cave as an alternative to having any impact on the environment.
 
Suck it up! We all have to concede to less than ideal existences
 
posted by James Hardy
 on August  3, 2009 #
 
Listen.
 
You  just like me, and every other human being  are a parasite of the earth. I dont mean that in a bad way.  The earth is a fertile host, providing oxygen, water, and other nutrients which fuel life.  You are a recipient of that life, for somewhere between 20 and 100 years.  Before you, others existed, and after you, others will remain.
 
During your time on earth, you can choose to do a few things:
 
a) Consciously make things worse for others
b) Consciously do no harm to others
c) Consciously make things better for others
 
Thats really about it.  You cant save the world and you probably cant destroy it either. As important as you may be, your deeds will be forgotten in X number of years.  For the less important among us, X is maybe 10.  For the most important, more like 5000.
 
Given that, the best thing to do is to simply have fun with your 20-100 years and stay in either Camp B or Camp C. Dont stress about all of the 3rd order derivatives of your actions and whether or not they meet some sort of gold standard for benevolence.  Be better than the average man, have fun doing it, and then take your place peacefully in the earth alongside the millions who came before you.  There is no point in suffering it does you no long-term good.
 
posted by Mike D.
 on August  4, 2009 #
 
This line of thinking has occurred to virtually every depressed college student who has thought about morality. I dont think it is a useful argument except for what it reveals about the person who is making it.  If you seriously think there is no way for you to do no harm, seek professional help.
 
Life is short and our brains our quite limited.  Filling our mind with ideas about how bad you and others are (especially dangerous) is about the worst use of mental energy.
 
I wash my hands of virtually all things that go under the banner of morality.  I think the term ethics is much more religiously neutral.  Give yourself some positive goals, things you can achieve.  Dont obsess about what you shouldnt be doing.  It is truly ridiculous, and if that werent enough, and soul killing.
 
posted by Jeremy Corbett
 on August  4, 2009 #
 
Too much concern about ethics has driven you mad.  Toss the Singer and join the Republican Party.  Youll be much happier.
 
posted by c23
 on August  6, 2009 #
 
I feel your pain because I used to be just as incapacitated by moral decision making as you seem to be.  The change came when I switched my world view from mere secular humanism to transhumanism/singularitarianism.  I had to get over my cynicism and actually trust that such fundamental changes to the world are possible and can be achieved.  Otherwise, I would probably recoil from life and wollow in my acquiescence (or worse).  The world is physically organized so as to cause suffering, and no amount of personal moral action or social innovation  can completely solve this problem.  In order to play the game differently we need to change the rules of the game.
 
posted by haig
 on August  7, 2009 #
 
Its actually quite simple - society as a whole (rightfully) only frowns on actions that would not be supported if everyone did them. We have plenty of cows that everyone in the world can buy McDoubles for only $1, but if everyone decided to steal from grocery stores, they would cease to exist.
 
posted by Jonathan Eddy
 on August 17, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 31, 2009
 
Title: Hot Girl Syndrome
 
One of the more thought-provoking CollegeHumor videos was their (exaggerated) attempt to imagine the inner life of an attractive woman. One of the things it makes clear is that being a hot girl means a constant stream of positive feedback: guys turn to smile at you, they laugh loudly at all your jokes, theyre always eager to do favors. The world just seems to bend itself to your desires.
 
One might think that such a constant stream of positive attention would make you particularly confident and resilient, but the human mind doesnt work that way; it adapts to its environment. Constant positive attention doesnt make you less dependent on praise any more than constant eating makes you less dependent on food. When someone comes along and says something mean, you dont fall back on your years of positive experiences and decide to ignore them. Instead, youre so shocked by the experience that you come away deeply wounded.
 
I think I first realized this when I visited a well-known author. Hed written several highly-regarded books which received apparently unanimous praise. If someones ever criticized him for something, Ive never seen it. Yet, when I saw him, he told me hed been feeling down for nearly a week. Why? Because a reader from Australia sent him a nasty email. The endless praise hadnt made him more resilient; it had made him unusually vulnerable.
 
I think this explains why the pick-up artists technique of the neg  a minor offhand insult intended to dent a girls self-esteem  is so particularly effective, especially on unusually attractive women. For people who arent used to being insulted, even a minor insult carries a powerful sting. (A major insult would probably be too strong, though. Theyd be too hurt to want to even associate with you.)
 
Another thing made clear in the video is that bidding for a girls affections is typically a kind dollar auction. A dollar auction is an auction where both the highest bidder and the second-higest bidder have to pay (even though only the highest bidder gets the prize). Rational behavior in a dollar auction isnt particularly clear  if youre the second-highest bidder, it always seems to make sense to bid a little more, since youll lose the same amount of money but at least get to take home the prize. But if you keep doing that, you soon find yourself paying ridiculously large amounts for something you might not even get.
 
With girls, there isnt a formal auction, but instead guys bid by buying her things, with no promise that theyll get anything in return. Since the things youve already spent so much, it always seems sensible to spend a little more to get the girl. The result, from the girls perspective, is that people are falling over themselves to buy you things without you having to give them anything in return.
 
Perhaps the safest way to win a dollar auction is not to play at all. And, indeed, this was Richard Feynmans surprising finding with women as well. He takes the advice of the bars MC to refuse to buy girls anything until youve asked her if shell sleep with you, and youre convinced that she will, and that shes not lying. (Feynman is taken aback by the suggestion: Uh you mean you dont uh you just ask them?)
 
But it works, and no doubt Hot Girl Syndrome is part of the reason why. When everyone is falling all over themselves for you, the only person you have to impress is the one guy who isnt.
 
The application to politics is left as an exercise for the reader.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 31, 2009
 
Is this actually what you think, or is this what you think other people think?
 
posted by Pat
 on August  1, 2009 #
 
Yes, life is filled with many complex game-theoretic dilemmas, where the optimal strategy is often non-obvious and difficult to execute in practice.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on August  3, 2009 #
 
Isnt your Richard Feynman link kind of a combination copyright violation and link farm (at the bottom of its main page)?
 
posted by Party-pooper
 on August  3, 2009 #
 
I was hanging out with my girlfriends sister recently.  The sister (21) looks, and behaves, like something straight out of The Hills.
 
She regaled us with tales of guys buying her drinks @ the airport on the way to visit us.
 
Some country musician even gave her a $300 belt buckle, making her pinky swear that she would promote his music in exchange.  (she rolls her eyes at this, as if she would ever lift her finger to promote anyone elses agenda)
 
I almost feel sorry for these women.  I really, really hope she cashes in on her looks (for her own sake) before they fade too much.  Normally Im not a big fan of Schadenfreude, but sometimes its just too tempting.
 
posted by anonymous dude
 on August  3, 2009 #
 
The psychologist Carol Dweck has done fascinating research on the role of praise with kids. She talks specifically about how certain types of praise universally encourage a fixed mindset, where the kids focus on preserving an image at the expense of self-improvement. I think this applies to adults as well, including your example here.
 
posted by Eugene Eric Kim
 on August  5, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 28, 2009
 
Title: The Median Voter and the Mixed Voter
 
Our minds work by making models of the world and using them to predict how things will happen. These models are powerful because theyre so deeply-ingrained we dont even realize were using them. They just seem like common sense. In politics, there are two major models for how voters think, which Ill call the median voter model and the mixed voter model.
 
The median voter model says that politics lives on a line from left to right. Voters are scattered across this line and vote for the politician thats closest to them on it. Politicians get elected by positioning themselves closest to the most voters, which usually means in the center of the line.
 
There are some complications, though. Because primary voters tend to be more extreme (i.e. Democratic primary voters are all on the left, Republicans on the right), politicians take a more extreme tack during the primaries, before heading back to the center for the general. And because they dont want to seem like flip-floppers, theyre somewhat constrained by the primary positions they take.
 
But, in general, this model is pretty widely-accepted in politics. So widely that its not even thought of as a model  its implicitly assumed by all the things political commentators say. Comments like Hes moving to the center to pick up votes, [X] couldnt get elected in that district, so how is someone more extreme going to make it? only make sense because we all have this model in our heads.
 
But, while I havent studied the question in detail, there doesnt seem to be much evidence for this model. Even intuitively, it doesnt make sense: does the average person really develop a location on a one-dimensional issue spectrum and then figure out where various politicians stand on that same spectrum? The notion seems almost ridiculous.
 
UPDATE: Andrew Gelman has studied the question in detail, and concludes that the median voter theorem doesnt seem to be true: My research with Jonathan Katz suggests that being a moderate is worth about 2% of the vote in a congressional election: it aint nuthin, but it certainly is not a paramount concern for most representatives.  Incumbent congressmembers almost always win reelection. And, when they dont, theyre often losing as part of a national swing (as in the 1994 Republican sweep or the 2006/2008 Democratic shift). And when an incumbent does lose unexpectedly, it can be for something unrelated to their votes (remember the check kiting scandal of 1992?).
 
The mixed voter model, promoted by George Lakoff and most prominently adopted by Howard Dean, says that voters arent rational, coherent evaluators but a bundle of feelings, prejudices, and contradictions. Politicians get elected by playing on the feelings voters already have that would encourage a voters support. Thus, instead of moving to the center to get more votes, Lakoff argued politicians should actually become more extreme. Conservatives won votes by appealing to peoples sense of order; liberals would have to respond by appealing to their sense of empathy. Moving to the center by promoting a compromise position that prevented rhetorical appeals of either type, was doomed. This model was used to explain why radical conservative politicians kept winning elections against moderate and centrist Democrats, when there was no evidence of a conservative electorate.
 
This model makes much more sense to me, although again I havent seen too much specific evidence for it. But its still pretty rare and seems deeply-counterintuitive to most practitioners of politics. But whether its right on the details or not, its clear that unless we evaluate and question these models and think about them critically instead of just assuming one is true, itll be hard to make much political progress.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 28, 2009
 
But its still pretty rare and seems deeply-counterintuitive to most practitioners of politics.
 
Most pundits, maybe. Most working practitioners, well, thats another matter.
 
Politicians get elected by playing on the feelings voters already have that would encourage a voters support. Thus, instead of moving to the center to get more votes, Lakoff argued politicians should actually become more extreme. Conservatives won votes by appealing to peoples sense of order; liberals would have to respond by appealing to their sense of empathy.
 
Shorter - The right-wing runs on fear-mongering (this is not news). Liberals have to respond by, not, I think, empathy, but justice.
 
But its really hard to do that in practice, for many reasons.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on July 28, 2009 #
 
I think its likely a combination of the two models: voters take positions not on one linear scale, but on a multitude of them, approximately one per issue.  Theres been some recognition of this with the idea of fiscally conservative democrats, but not much - I think because its too complicated for the media to get across, so they ignore it.
 
posted by PJ
 on July 28, 2009 #
 
Also, you might save some time by looking into how the deep trenches political modeling is done in, for example, redistricting. I have a feeling youre on your way to reinventing something along those lines.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on July 28, 2009 #
 
I googled irrational attitude of submission to authority (without quotes) and your Stanford: Day 16 Deep Thought blog entry was the second hit listed.  Havent checked out your blog since a couple of months back when your name was mentioned on CSPAN in reference to a study you did on Wikipedia.  At that time you were still on hiatus.
 
Speaking of Wikipedia, the entry: Stochastic volatility, even though it refers to a financial model would seem to explain the less than linear configuration into which voters arrange themselves respective to each other.  Just swap the variables of goods or services and consumers with politicians and voters.
 
It would certainly suit the ends of those trying to establish an oligarchy of the more financially able to convince people that they exist on such a one dimensional plain (respective to each other.)
 
posted by James Hardy
 on July 29, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 27, 2009
 
Title: Writing a Book: Part One (Ambition)
 
So Im writing a book. In some sense, this is nothing new. Ive wanted to write a book since I was probably five and since then I must have started seriously writing drafts of half a dozen, before abandoning them. But this one feels different somehow. I really think Im going to finish it.
 
I dont want to say what its about publicly yet (hint: it has to do with politics), but its ambitious  perhaps ridiculously so; when I tell people at parties about it they look at me as if trying to determine whether Ive gone mad. My goals for it are ambitious too: I want it to be popular (how hard is it to be a national bestseller?), I want it to be great writing (accurate, nuanced, and hard-to-put-down), and I want it to make a difference (get people organized, change government policy). Oh, come on. Now youre giving me that look.
 
I suppose most authors want these things, but it doesnt seem like they try particularly hard. And in a way thats understandable: writing 300 coherent pages is hard enough  why add all these additional requirements? But I have high standards for books. (Im almost always disappointed.) I figure the least I can do is try my best to live up to them myself.
 
Just as Ive always wanted to write a book, Ive always wondered how you write one. The problem is that the kind of people who would write books on how they write books are usually pretty dreadful writers and I cant stand their poor writing, let alone their sense of superiority. (This is why I kept throwing On Writing Well against the wall.) But Ive never written a book before, so I dont feel superior, and Im at least trying to be a great writer. So for people in the same boat, I thought Id write about what its like.
 
It started with an email. Id written a blog post on management that had gotten some attention, including a link from the famed Jason Kottke. Apparently the New York literati all read Jasons blog, because an editor at a publishing house followed the link and read my piece and thought it might make a decent book. He worked for the business book imprint of a major-name publisher and invited me to give him a call and discuss the idea further.
 
Normally when I come up with book ideas, I dont tell more than a couple people about them. Ive certainly never talked to anyone at a major-name publisher before. So getting this email was thrilling. Id always imagined Id have to pitch my book to publishers someday, but now publishers were coming to me, and asking for a book! It gave the whole thing a seriousness those other book projects lacked.
 
I told him I was heading to New York soon and he invited me to lunch at the Knickerbocker. It was the kind of place you imagine New York businesspeople meet for lunch: guys in suits, wood-paneled walls, I think I might have even spotted a cigar.
 
The editor was very excited and encouraging, but as we talked I grew increasingly discouraged. I began to remember how much I hate business books with a passion, how ridiculously dumb and faddish they are. For his part, the editor complained about how the rest of the world didnt take business books seriously. They sold ten times better than normal books, he said, but the New York Times refuses to list any of them on their prestigious nonfiction bestseller list (theres a special section just for business bestsellers thats only published monthly and buried away).
 
Furthermore, the books are apparently sold in the most degrading ways  motivational talks at the Learning Annex were mentioned. Id always imagined myself as more of a Charlie Rose guy. I wanted to write a bestseller, it was true, but mostly for the respect, not the money. For the people I hang out with, I suspect writing a bestselling business book would bring me only ridicule.
 
Afterward I met with a prominent book agent that my friend introduced me to  apparently one of the towns top ten. She was brilliant and enthusiastic and full of energy. Spending an hour batting around ideas with her was lots of fun. Her shelves were lined with the famous books her authors had published and I began to dream about a future among those names.
 
But that was just the intro, for the details she handed me off to an associate, who explained the next step was to turn my idea into a rough outline. So I went back to where I was staying and tried to do just that. But I just couldnt. I went for walks, I pounded my head against the desk, I tried moving words around on the screen, but I couldnt seem to find a way to make the business book idea make sense. The fundamental problem was simple: who would take business advice from a teenager?
 
As I was working on it, another idea (well call it the politics book) began nagging at the back of my head. I tried not to think of it, but it wouldnt go away. The more I told it to bug off, the louder it nagged. Finally, I decided I would get the business book out of the way quickly and then do the politics one. But as my idea for the business book fell apart in my hands, the plan for the politics book grew clearer and clearer. I began talking about it, getting excited about it, even doing a whole outline for it. It seemed so perfect, so right. Finally, my girlfriend asked why I didnt just do that book instead.
 
The associate agent was tepid (I guess politics books dont sell as well), but intrigued enough to suggest I pursue it. He said the next step was to work on expanding my description of the introduction. And somehow I got it in my head that the best way to do this would be to just try and write it.
 
Which meant I needed to figure out how to write.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 27, 2009
 
Out of this, two things come to mind:
 
a) Michael Gerbers The E-Myth Revisited probably fits your description of bad business books, but has nevertheless earned a place among my favorite books. (Not sure if this one is too simplistic for yours taste, though.)
 
b) KLFs The Manual (http://www.kirps.com/web/main/resources/music/themanual/) is an entertaining reference for those who want to have a bestseller, but dont know how to write.
 
posted by Tommi
 on July 27, 2009 #
 
Congratulations on taking the plunge.  Ive subscribed to various writing magazines and peruse the web for all things writing as well, and in some respects there is a lot of advice on how one particular person writes or a pill-like version of how one can quickly become an amazing wordsmith.
 
The best advice Ive received is the hands-on approach, being, write all the time and figure out how you operate.  Be willing to produce god-awful sentences and drafts in order to figure out what ticks your tock.
 
Ive completed one full book out of about five tries it took me seeing an entire book through just to figure out what it takes for me, personally, to get the job done.  Now Im writing a second book and its going along much more swimmingly.
 
So, basically, write a book.. write a book badly even.  With the experience you gain in learning what YOU do to write a book you can rewrite that book again or move onto another one.  Theres no quick and easy way about it, you just have to put in the effort.
 
Best of luck!
 
posted by nick
 on July 28, 2009 #
 
The fundamental problem was simple: who would take business advice from a teenager?
 
Well, similar sorts of people who would take politics advice? :-)
 
Really, Ive never seen any deep connection between qualifications of an author and popularity of a book.
Get yourself on Oprah somehow, and the sales will take care of themselves.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on July 28, 2009 #
 
Write a book about the politically progressive genius of George W. Bush, Dick Cheney, Donald Rumsfeld, John McCain, Richard Armitage, Tom Delay, Sarah Palin, Bill OReilly, Ann Coulter and/or Rush Limbaugh and how their feigned right-wing extremism was a calculated effort to cause people to reexamine their political views.  Or maybe you could write some political satire.
 
posted by James Hardy
 on July 29, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 24, 2009
 
Title: My Life Offline
 
Everyone wants to know how my month offline was. They ask it casually, like Hows work going? or Whatd you do this weekend? But its not a casual question. It was a huge, incredible, transformative experience. Those 30 days felt like six months. My habits changed, my relationships changed, my identity changed, my personality changed  hell, the physical shape of my body changed dramatically. I went through four legal pads trying to describe what it was like. Im still not sure I really know.
 
One thing is clear, though: my normal life style isnt healthy. This doesnt seem like the kind of thing that requires a break to learn. I imagine people with unhealthy lifestyles know theyre unhealthy. They come home after work and say I cant go on like this, they cry randomly in elevators. But I didnt know. Life online is practically the only life I know. Sure, I guess things were different when I was very young  I remember, after getting my first email account, wishing someone would email me so Id have an email to answer (even then I knew Id soon be missing those empty-inbox days)  but for most of my life, this has been it: a jumble of interruptions and requests and jobs and people, largely carried out alone. It never let up, so I never saw anything different. How was I to know there was anything wrong?
 
But the last few weeks have made it clear there was  is. These weeks havent felt that different my other weeks online, really  same jumble of work and people and interruptions as always. The usual sense that Im never really here, Im always worried about the million things around the corner: a todo list that goes for pages, a thousand emails to respond to, hundreds of blog posts to read, twenty open tabs, a dozen IM windows, a text message to answer, a Twitter stream to catch up on. I never used to think about these things as a benefit or a distraction  I didnt think about them at all; they were just how life online was. This was the era of multitasking and I was its child. If I felt anything about it, it was pride  a kind of joy in (mostly) managing to handle a thousand different things thrown my way at once. But I never knew what life was like when things werent constantly being thrown at you. Until it stopped, I never knew how awful it really was.
 
I am not happy. I used to think of myself as just an unhappy person: a misanthrope, prone to mood swings and eating binges, who spends his days moping around the house in his pajamas, too shy and sad to step outside. But thats not how I was offline. I loved people  everyone from the counter clerk to the old friends I bumped into on the street. And I loved to go for walks and exercise in the gym and  even though there was no one around to see me  groom. Yes, groom: shower and shave and put on nice clothes and comb my hair and clean up my nails and so on, all things a month ago I would have said went against my very nature, things I never did before voluntarily.
 
But most of all, I felt not just happy, but firmly happy  solid, is the best way I can put it. I felt like I was in control of my life instead of the other way around, like its challenges just bounced off me as I kept doing what I wanted. Normally I feel buffeted by events, a thousand tiny distractions nagging at the back of my head at all times. Offline, I felt in control of my own destiny. I felt, yes, serene.
 
When I was very young, my parents introduced me to a book called Flow. It argued that people good at their jobs went into a sort of flow state  they were in the zone  where the normal stress of the world faded away and all their concentration was focused on the task at hand. It wasnt fun the way ice cream or sex is fun  it didnt make you smile, just look grimly determined  but it was somehow more than that. It was fulfilling. And that was even better than a smile.
 
I go into such states when programming or writing and they are indeed fantastic, but also weirdly hollow. When you come out the real world  with its mundane stresses and distractions  comes crashing back in, and the moment of flow seems like just another temporary escape, an elusive dream. And its a hard one to get back.
 
I still had flow states while offline  stronger than ever, in fact: I spent an ecstatic afternoon and evening writing longhand in a trance, pouring out the first forty pages of the book Ive been researching; afterward, I was on a bigger high than Ive ever had in my life  but they didnt feel like escapes. Normal days werent painful anymore. I didnt spend them filled with worry, like before. Offline, I felt solid and composed. Online, I feel like my brain wants to run off in a million different directions, even when I try to point it forward.
 
A friend asked me if I knew I was privileged to be able to take such a break. It seemed a silly question: I feel privileged every day. As I write, my best friend is broke and homeless, much of the world struggles just to stay alive. I feel privileged to own a mattress, let alone take a break.
 
I realize everyones lives are filled with work and people and distractions  the situation brewing at the office, the sump pump breaking down at the house, the family member whos fallen ill. I realize it must seem like the greatest arrogance to think one could escape lifes mundane concerns, like asking to live on a cloud, floating above the mere mortals. But it was that arrogance that made me think I could contribute to adult mailing lists when I was still in elementary school, that arrogance that made me think someone might want to read my website when I was still just a teen, that arrogance that had me start a company as a college freshman. That sort of arrogance  not bragging, but simply inwardly thinking I could do more than was expected of me  is the only thing thats gotten me anywhere in life. I see no reason to stop now.
 
I dont know how Im going to carve a life away from the worlds constant demands and distractions. I dont know how Im going to balance all the things I want to do with the pressures and responsibilities they bring. But after my month off, I do know one thing: I cant go on like this. So Im damn well going to try.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 24, 2009
 
Posts like this are real gifts to people Aaron, because you are putting yourself out there and exposing yourself, so that others can think about their own experiences.
 
But a quibble: you never say what the difference is between the off- and on-line lives, and what makes one better than the other.  I was unable to discern the source of your unhappy on-line life.
 
posted by David Shankbone
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
Sorry if that was unclear, David. Ive added these lines to the post:
 
The usual sense that Im never really here, Im always worried about the million things around the corner: a todo list that goes on for pages, a thousand emails to respond to, hundreds of blog posts to read, twenty open tabs, a dozen IM windows, a text message to answer, a Twitter stream to catch up on. I never used to think about these things as a problem  they were just how life online was.
 
Does that help?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
I relate to that.  I register at social network sites like Twitter just to capture my name, but I only am active on one: Facebook.  I have almost no time to keep up with it.  Many e-mails that are of a chatty nature that I would like to respond to, now go unanswered as I feel a little overwhelmed.  Part of the reason I stopped the photography for Wikipedia was because it was so much work, and I was never left feeling satisfied by it.  That wasnt true when I started, but it has become true years later.
 
I havent been successful at figuring out the happy medium between having a rich on-line and off-line life.  If anything, it feels like peoplenot just nerds like meare going more on-line, so that friendships only exist around bits and Bebo (or Twitter, or FB, ot whatever).
 
Its something Ive given a lot of thought to, and I very much related to your post about the quandry: whats substantive on-line vs. off-line?  I dont know what my Facebook friendships really mean to me or to the other people, and I havent been what people consider a good Facebook Friend as I dont go on there that often.
 
Its difficult to figure it all out, but its heartening to read someone else going through something similar.  Thanks for the post.
 
posted by David Shankbone
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
Incredibly beautiful, honest, touching post.  Thanks Aaron.
 
posted by Nat Friedman
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
Nice writeup. I spent a week or so changing pace when I left the Post, I think I felt a similar if less intense change. And this is going to sound all Lifehacker-y, but Ive gotten a lot out of installing the Leechblock extension to Firefox. All the sites I like to spend hours browsing or chatting or poking around on are blocked every day except for a little time in the morning and evenings. If it doesnt occur to me to visit in those short windows, OK, maybe Ill remember tomorrow. These things dont matter much, so why let them intrude on me all of the time?
 
Its one little fix. Theres still IM and cell phones and IRC and feeds and and and but knowing that these things exist to serve me rather than vice-versa is what lets me leave them all closed and off most of the time, to live my life at my pace and on my schedule.
 
Best wishes in rebuilding your life.
 
posted by Peter Harkins
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
Sadly, many of the flow states people find compelling, and the ride of being busy are called the zen of this or that, but mindlessness is quite different from mindfulness. Ive been enjoying 2 weeks offline retreats for a number of years now  though I fear not this summer. Check out Peace Is Every Step: The Path of Mindfulness in Everyday Life by Thich Nhat Hanh.
 
posted by Joseph Reagle
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
Here via quinns twitter link. Theres much food for thought here, and I say that as someone who on the whole quite likes my multitask-y online life. (Still, when I go on retreat, Im always amazed by how different things feel.)
 
In theory, I think what youre talking about here is precisely why Jewish tradition mandates the observance of Shabbat. What would it be like to take one day each week away from the to-do lists, the obligations, the unread blog posts, the inchoate obligation to be witty on twitter or facebook or [insert online social space here]? In my line of work we say that even God rested on the seventh day, so surely we can too, but in contemporary life (especially for those of us who more or less live on the internet) thats easier said than done.
 
I dont have the inclination at this point to take Shabbat off entirely from technology. Thats not my form of practice, right now. But I do try to take the day away from anything that feels even remotely onerous. If that means I dont open my aggregator or refresh my twitter homepage, great. (And sometimes I do pop in to twitter or irc because being there feels like a way of connecting with friends. It all depends on how I feel about it in that moment  which in turn means I need to be awake to my own needs. Also harder than it sounds!)
 
Anyway. Thanks for this.
 
posted by Rachel Barenblat
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
Aaron, this essay is splendid. I have been feeling these exact emotions, oscillating between thinking perhaps this is just a new phase in my brain chemistry, and that the monotony of web-work has sapped my life-force. So many people tout the joys of working at home. But I say to hell with it. Put me in a room full of my team-mates. Make us look and each-other and relate.
 
Have you read the book: zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance? I think it might speak somewhat to the struggle that you are undergoing. It has totally changed the way I look at work and life. Take a look if you have not already.
 
(word to Peter for already mentioning zen)
 
posted by Woody Schneider
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
I had an experience very similar to what you describe above.  I am only 23 and as such have spent the majority of my life online and in the multi-tasking world.  Now I am married and have a job in IT and its still the same, having to do 80 things at once with millions of distractions nagging away at you everywhere. Even when I was off work life consisted of playing games online with friends or the wife where all those distractions were still constant. It was the normal for me and I didnt know any better.
 
Then one day I decided to build a brick patio in my backyard with my wife.  This was quite a projectm it required excavating a lot of dirt and doing may things I wasnt used to.  I ended up spending 4 hours every day after work, building it for almost a month.  The amount of work, and the exhaustion after a full day of work plus 4 hours of manual labor, pretty much only gave me about an hour a day to be online.  It was amazing.
 
Once I wasnt online constantly I realized I didnt need to be.  I was happy working myself to the bone because it gave me time to enjoy fully focusing on less than 40 things at a time. No more checking my email while alt-tabbed from some game, while also worrying about my ebay auction and random IMs from friends.  Just me, my wife, a shovel and some dirt.
 
I also greatly enjoyed being outside in the sun and doing the hard work.  After sitting all day exhausting myself mentally coding or scripting or doing any kid of IT work, doing something productive and physical was a wonderful change.
 
I can completely understand where your coming from, and while you obviously cant continue your current profession and eliminate online activity, trying to find 4-5 hours a day where you dont touch a computer or any device that allows pc like multi-tasking would be a good idea in my opinion.
 
Chris
 
posted by Chris
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
Ok, ok, I know there is something inherently twee about linking to a This I Believe essay, but this one about the rest step I read years ago: http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=5316322 
came to mind. I have been since I read it trying to learn to take the pace metaphor therein to heart. I feel like for me integration of these worlds is what I need- learn to rest completely in the moments between moments, and to be present completely in the moments between them, and to do one thing at a time. I am not saying I can do this. Well, I can, but I dont keep it up. Its just too enticing to be caught up in how Absolutely Important Everything is Right Now.
 
Thanks for this post, and Ill be fine.
 
posted by quinn
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
Thanks for sharing this experience, Aaron.
 
Most people dont get the opportunity to disconnect over such a long period of time, but everyone can practice disconnection in small ways every day. For example, when I go out to go eat or walk around the neighborhood for long periods of time, Ill leave my phone behind. Also, I take time every so often to remove distractive cruft such as old to-dos and unnecessary habits such as a TV show or twitter that I dont need to be consuming my life with.
 
It is also very important to identify where you are pressuring yourself to be too responsive (whether it is commitment tendency or perceived social reinforcement).
 
posted by Jamie Pitts
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
Hi Aaron,
Thank you for a brave and honest post. This is the first Ive read of yours, so maybe you are always so open.
Good luck.
If you listen to yourself and trust your instincts, you will be fine.
Speaking as a person who likes the sound of his own voice too much, a person who thinks out loud and needs a sounding board to know he has value, I have found peace in practicing quietness.
Again, thank you and good luck.
~Dave
 
posted by Dave Manningsmith
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
Aaron,
 
Adventures like the one you just had are valuable experiences. They help you find your left and right limits. However, I suspect that it is for you as it is for most, that the most appropriate path is one somewhere in-between. Each path was taken for various reasons. You will find comfort when you can integrate and balance those paths.
 
(Here via twitter http://bit.ly/8saTQ)
 
posted by Chaim Krause
 on July 24, 2009 #
 
Well said and thanks, time for a shower and a walk!
 
posted by One
 on July 25, 2009 #
 
Good article :)
 
Theres a small typo in the front page.
 
whose brilliant idea was it to set off the file alarm the same day the building is doing fire alarm testing?
 
I believe the first one was FIRE alarm not File.
 
Please delete this comment!
 
posted by Anand
 on July 25, 2009 #
 
Please go read For the New Intellectual
 
You are obviously a smart person who is trapped in a world of people that have denied reality. You dont feel that what you do makes you happy. You need to learn how to be happy, and its not some mystical thing that just comes and goes. I wish you the best.
 
posted by Tom
 on July 25, 2009 #
 
Sounds like a case of maturity, now if you find Religion, you can go back to things and have a purpose in life.
 
posted by George Scott
 on July 25, 2009 #
 
I dont get it.
 
posted by saxon
 on July 25, 2009 #
 
It really sounds like addiction to me. I am a recovering drug addict myself.  And I identified with your experience.  Addiction is a disease and whether its to drugs, sex, gambling or the internet, the stories are always the same.  Think about it.
 
posted by mister
 on July 25, 2009 #
 
your description of flow and finding a balance remind me of this ted talk by martin seligman on positive psychology.
 
http://www.ted.com/talks/martin_seligman_on_the_state_of_psychology.html
 
posted by 
 on July 25, 2009 #
 
Ive been doing some serious investigation into this feeling of being scattered, performing various experiments, meditation, taking breaks, practicing <a href=http://www.idellepacker.net/applications/dailyact/nondoing.php>non-doing
 
I share the same perpetual, albeit slight, anxiety about the thousand things around the corner  - email, rss, always remembering not to fall behind and it seems pretty unhealthy.
 
Anyway, it is fascinating hearing about your experience.  I am really curious about what the roots of it could be and how one could have an online life without the negative parts.
 
posted by Todd Troxell
 on July 25, 2009 #
 
I found the link to Pomodoro technique on some website. I was really glad I saw it. Google for pomodoro technique if you are interested. If you liked Aarons post, youll definitely like this technique.
 
posted by vikram 
 on July 25, 2009 #
 
Aaron,
 
Web is such a good place to learn, and serendipity a good way to find your post ;)
 
I had the chance to have had a life before the web became central in my life (Im in for more than 10 years because of my job) and to have the habit to be quite resistant to technology I focus on uses/usability more than on technical aspects.
 
I agree with people who talked about addiction : in some points its all about that
 
but its also about deep changes between generations and ways to appropriate ones own life Some of us can think that if they do have an online life they are alive, because you have to be in
 
when I opened my first blog (lately ;) in 2006, I decided not to post as everyone, everyday or as often as I could, but only to post when I will have something relevant to say A paradoxal habit for someone that was and is teaching about how to use the web as  a professional ;)Its a personal approach, indeed to take distance from a very time-consuming tool
 
Now that Im writing this com I remember a documentary I watched 10 years ago already about a young guy whos life was online, Justin, its a movie of Doug Block Better than mean guns : http://old.d-word.com/journal/5-3-99.html. I wrote at this time a comment : I do work as a internet animator. the relationship u describes in ur film was talking to me even if i am not totally net addicted
 
10 years later, I began for the need of a buzz a series of posts on my blog and on facebook (in French), I ironically titled column (chronicle) of a net addicted which looks after itself;)
 
I knew when I bought my Blackberry that my life -  what you call you offline life - was somehow over of course, you always have the choice to switch off but there is so much life in all that is moving every minute on the web (since RSS, FB status and twitter its always more true) that its difficult to resist to all that attractive shining stars
 
its something close in my mind to the gold rush crossed with the humming of a hive ;)
 
So I try to balance my life (in fact you just have one life) between passing time around and out, sharing time with people I love, going to the cinema or to see plays or concerts, and when Im online, I often try to translate/communicate/share this real life to/with my networks
 
And I love to find and read what other people post to help, share, relate,  on the web so to me web is only a new place where you can be, a new tool that you can use, you have the choice to decide how often, and what to do with just as with work, chocolate, TV, money, whatever you have to know you well and to define what is good for you, and act following these points.
 
Sorry to have been so long, but I found echo in your article, approach and comments of things Im thinking about for a long time ;)
 
PS : sorry for my English I hope to be readable ;)
 
posted by Tiffany
 on July 26, 2009 #
 
Two things:
 1. I remember, after getting my first email account, wishing someone would email me so Id [have] an email to answer.
 2. Stay arrogant.
 
posted by Pablo
 on July 26, 2009 #
 
In your post announcing your experiment, you ask, What if theres an emergency? Has there ever been an emergency?  Yes, there has.  If somethings really an emergency, Im sure youll find me.  Heres the nub of the thing, as I see it.  Constant connectedness is a form of risk mitigation.  I pay the price of constant distraction to reduce the probability of rare catastrophe (e.g., my parents dying before I have a chance to say goodbye, or a hurricane hitting before I have my survival pack together).  It sounds like your tradeoffs & preferences are different from mine; Im not going to wait for others to find me so I can learn salient, time-critical information.
 
You compare avoiding the worlds demands and distractions to other things youve done, achievements that exceeded expectations concerning people your age.  But all those achievements were social and contributed to the external world.  Withdrawing from the things youve built and the communities youve joined breaks a different norm. No longer are you implying that youre good enough to hang out and compete with other people; withdrawing implies that were not worth your time.  So Id quibble with your statement that its the same arrogance that underlies both attempts.
 
Good luck in finding a balance between solitude and connection.
 
posted by Sumana Harihareswara
 on July 27, 2009 #
 
Please tell me the 40 pages you are writing is a book about yet another philosophy disguising how to drop high tech addictions.
 
posted by El Rorro
 on July 28, 2009 #
 
If you are so enlightened why dont you invent a new kind of energy, solve the world hunger or cure AIDS (or cancer)?
 
posted by Le Chuck
 on July 28, 2009 #
 
Thank you for your for your honest writeup of how your life feels now. Im sure this can be wakeup call for some people. Its too easy to be living in constant distraction and sometimes it takes what you did to notice even some of the things that were forgotten or not even noticed before.
 
Life offline might have limitations, but its still much better than life in prison of constant online addiction.
 
posted by Daniel Schildt
 on July 28, 2009 #
 
I dont know if youll ever all of the comments, but I tweeted about this post, and this is what I wrote:
 
Im sorry, but posts like this one bring a tear to my eye: http://www.aaronsw.com/webl ..what a masterpiece, Im moved.
 
Aaron, youve taken a lot of words that I was never courageous enough to say..
 
Zigmund
 
posted by Zigmund
 on October  7, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 20, 2009
 
Title: Namedropping
 
I was having tea the other day with Nancy Pelosi, when she got a call from her good friend Tom Hanks. Tom wanted to tell her about how hed been out with his favorite shopping partner, Paris Hilton, when Paris accidentally swung a bag of clothes into the face of her aide, Ken Burns. Ken, of course, was already feeling bad after losing his therapist, Warren Buffett. He had to fire him after Warren kept spending their sessions raving about his new chef, Frank Gehry. Frank, you know, always left work in a towering rage, going home to scream obscenities at his housekeeper, Thomas Friedman. Last time Thomas took it out on a cab driver, Woody Allen. Woody spent the rest of the day feeling dejected until, on his way home, he was approached by Richard Posner, covered in rags and begging for spare change.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 20, 2009
 
Welcome back.
 
posted by Jesper
 on July 20, 2009 #
 
How was your month off?
 
posted by PLJ
 on July 20, 2009 #
 
What??? No mention of Kevin Bacon???
 
posted by KiltBear
 on July 20, 2009 #
 
Good to have you back.
 
posted by Warren Yoder
 on July 20, 2009 #
 
I think you need another month off
 
posted by 
 on July 20, 2009 #
 
I dont get it.
 
posted by Larry Roberts
 on July 21, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: May 18, 2009
 
Title: A Life Offline
 
I have literally had a computer since birth; the Internet came not long after that: I still remember email addresses supplemented by UUCP bang-paths. Hardly a day has gone by in which I havent checked my email for what must be a decade.
 
The Internet has kept me connected to peopleas a child, all my best friends were online; as an adult, all my coworkers are. My jobs do not take place in an office; they take place over email, where time and place do not matter. The upside, is that I can go anywhere and still do them. The downside, is I cannot get away from them.
 
I need to take a break. My life has become entangled with technology and pressure that I hardly know any other way of life. So Im planning to spend the month of June (June 6 to July 4, to be exact) offline. Im packing up the laptop and the cable modem and sending them someplace far away. Im going back to the world of paper and books.
 
Of course, my phone is now a computer too, so that will also have to go. I dont have a landline, so if folks want to talk to me theyll have to write letters (heres my address). I (amazingly) dont have any clocks or calendars, so I wont even know what time it is. All of which means no more meetings or coordinating to hang out with people. I suppose people could call on me, but honestly, I wish they wouldnt  at least at first.
 
I dont feel like the kind of person who could survive on Walden Pond  Im a finicky eater and not a huge fan of animals in any capacity. So locking myself in my apartment seems about as close as I can get. There will of course be the clerks at stores and people on the street, but for the most part Ill be alone.
 
Ive experimented with it a little  both my phone and my laptop have died recently  and its liberating. Walking down the street or waiting in lines, I find myself checking my phone compulsively, using it to send my mind to some other world of email or news. Without it, I feel grounded. And my laptop is even worse  a beckoning world of IMs to friends, brain-gelatinizing television shows, and an endless pile of emails to answer. Its like a constant stream of depression. A day without it made me feel like I was human again.
 
I want to be human again. Even if that means isolating myself from the rest of you humans.
 
What if theres an emergency? Has there ever been an emergency? The biggest urgent things seem to be that my servers go down. Which sucks, but I need to be able to walk away from that. If you have things hosted on one of my machines, contact me now and Ill try to get you enough privileges that you can fix things if they break. If somethings really an emergency, Im sure youll find me.
 
Have a nice June.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 18, 2009
 
Technology is not so much the problem as the loss of focus from an interrupt-driven culture. You might consider meditation or other techniques to regain focus, and eventually allow you to master technology on your own terms.
 
posted by Fazal Majid
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
Go for it.  I think shutting everything off every once in awhile does help.   You should go somewhere though, not stay in your apartment.  Last time I shut everything off, I went to Alaska camping with strangers because it was the last thing I would ever do.  It was great.
 
posted by Jim Gilliam
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
I want to be human again. Even if that means isolating myself from the rest of you humans.
 
Yeah, good luck with that.
 
Dude, people worked out ways to connect with each other before we had microprocessors. You might start by buying a nice, paper datebook.
 
posted by misuba
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
You should definitely travel instead of staying in your apartment.
 
Get a good bike or good shoes and just start going. Bring a credit card, and you should be fine.
 
Using http://aribnb.com you should be able to find a place to sleep each night. Just kidding!
 
Just ask people when you have meals where you should go next. Ohh, and bring a friend.
 
posted by Ivan Kirigin
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
A technology fast sounds like it is in order but shouldnt you use the opportunity to connect with people one-on-one instead of shutting them out?  If you dont you wont have a A Life Offline - youll have no life.
 
posted by Doug Martin
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
Youve read enough Weber to know that this is ultra-conspicuous consumption, yeah? You could wear a diamond coat on your holiday too, I guess
 
posted by Carl
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
I might be misinterpreting but I think back to the world of humans and talking might serve you better than back to the world of paper and books. I mean no offense but if youre really looking for a life offline I think changing your method of information consumption is irrelevant. If it was me, I would see much more of a change if I swapped info-consumption for personal interaction than I would if I simply changed my info-consumption media format.
 
Besides, youll get over wanting to be alone pretty fast, unless you have severe psychological problems. True isolation brings on neurosis in exceptionally healthy people and psychosis in everyone else. But hey, good luck and stuff.
 
posted by Giles Bowkett
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
well, I bid you good luck.
 
But even if you have no clock, I suppose it wouldnt hurt to get a cheap watch ?
 
posted by Darkoneko
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
As a resident of Concord, I can say that Thoreau wasnt exactly roughing it at Walden - its a 10 minute walk from the center of town, a journey he made pretty frequently. I think his purpose was more to find himself and connect with nature than to rough it. Still, your idea is interesting, best of luck.
 
posted by WJ
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
This is the most interesting and unexpected post Ive read on your blog.  It seems you are planning the technology retreat as a means to get away from certain types of interactions with other people, but also because of dissatisfaction with compulsive use of technology as a distraction.  You speak of feeling grounded and human when you arent so distracted.  But youve left us imagining youre going to hole up with a big pile of books.  Big piles of books are what we brainiacs use for distraction instead of (or in addition to) mind-gelatinizing TVdistraction from our own free-running thoughts and feelings.
 
I would recommend a very small pile of booksabout meditation, mindfulness, and basic buddhist teachings.  You will benefit more from your one-month retreat than Thoreau did from his two years.
 
posted by Paul
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
But youll miss the new iPhone launch.
 
posted by CW
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
I had a similar breakdown recently, and similarly wasnt ready to go back to nature. Instead go back urban - head to NYC, London, Paris, Berlin, you get the idea, and just roam around checking out art, restaurants and bars, listen to peoples stories and reconnect with old friends.
 
One small thing about going old school:
Keep a cellphone on you, just disable e-mail and the ringer. This is because socializing is now truly impossible without a cellphone and features like internet and maps really are clutch whether you like it or not (A-Z is RETARDED in 2009, and imagine buying movie or concert tickets without a cellphone or internet device).
 
Have fun - it really is refreshing to reset.
 
posted by Aditya Advani
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
I enjoyed reading your post.  I agree with the other commenters: take the opportunity to connect with people offline, because thats part of being human.
 
posted by Tim
 on May 19, 2009 #
 
best of luck. will wait for your review - life without tech
 
posted by Nilesh Babu
 on May 19, 2009 #
 
You sir, are an idoit. If you eliminate tech from your life, thats cool. But withdrawing from society is totally the wrong thing to do. Why dont you play soccer or something? Its not like all of your interactions with other people have to be mediated by IM, SMS or the cash register at your 7-11, is it?
 
posted by Growly Curmudgeon
 on May 19, 2009 #
 
Thats a great move, Aaron. Not too long ago, on one of my trekking trips, I managed to forget my phone (and internet) home. This was only for a week, but it was truly refreshing.
 
posted by Tommi
 on May 19, 2009 #
 
Its going to be tough to both remain social and stay true to your offline commitment.  The yogic mind in me says you definitely need a period of meditative isolation when you begin this quest that is, a period of a few days to really break with the old.  Then you should feel comfortable venturing out into the world I wouldnt recommend actively avoiding networked interactions (looking over someones shoulder at something theyve asked you to look at), but merely notice them and notice when youre at the brink of getting sucked in then walk away.
 
posted by joe
 on May 19, 2009 #
 
I resisted posting this at first because I dont know exactly what kind of experiment youll be doing. Maybe you have too many social connections and obligations, and you need to withdraw from them. But if the problem really is the technology end of things, youll still need social connections if you give up technology.
 
After a few days or weeks of isolation, you might feel the need to get out. But this can be lonely if youre always surrounded by strangers. Its natural to share information and ideas with others, talk about problems, help out (very rewarding), eat together, etc. One of the easiest ways to get a community around you is to hang out often with a group like Green Drinks, Habitat for Humanity, Critical Mass, a hiking or walking or exercise group, a book club, a community garden, etc. etc. depending on your interests and passions in meatspace. (Belonging to a church fulfills all sorts of human needs like this, but for those like me who arent comfortable with the worshipping God part, finding a community is harder.) The idea is to mix with the same people over and over until you have some natural chemistry with them.
 
You can find these groups through Meetup, or Google, but it might be more rewarding to do your Google searches by asking random strangers if they know somebody who knows somebody who can answer your question
 
From a sociological perspective, Im sure you know all about the basic need of humans to be part of a community, and youre already plugged into plenty of virtual communities, so maybe your experiment is more about having time alone with yourself than simply unplugging.
 
posted by Scott Teresi
 on May 19, 2009 #
 
I applaud your idea, such experiments (if thought through and done in good faith) are regular sources of, at the very least, numerous small truths. I would, however, recommend you complement your experiment (its the perfect time to try) with some simple vipassana meditation. Take half an hour daily, sit still and mind your breathing. Focus on each breath as it enters and leaves your body. Dont be frustrated if your mind wonders, be joyful that youve caught the fact. Thats it, and thats enough. God speed.
 
posted by Gronk
 on May 21, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: May 18, 2009
 
Title: This Month in Sociology
 
based on Contexts sociology roundup
 
A new study finds that marriage has been making people increasingly unhappy for the past 30 years. Even when they say theyre happy with their relationship, married people are unhappier overall. Indeed, the effect is so large that it cancels out the happiness gains the unmarried population has made in the past 30 years.
 
Meanwhile, in Portugal the police have been arresting whole neighborhoods and transporting them all to jail. Now prisoners can serve with their old family and friends.
 
Rich countries tend to be more accepting of minorities, while most strippers have terrible working conditions. Moving increases crime, the DUI gender gap is narrowing, and media coverage encourages sports hooligans. Young people are increasingly critical of war.
 
Blacks are moving back to the south, while dual citizenship is increasingly permitted. Ugandans educated at foreign  colleges and universities are twice as likely to be employed as equally-educated Ugandans who never left and three times as likely to be employed as foreign-born immigrants.
 
Appalachian boys prefer working with their hands to booksmarts.
 
with apologies to Paul Ford and Roger Hodge
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 18, 2009
 
Citations that I could follow would be handy.
 
posted by Noah Slater
 on May 20, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: May 17, 2009
 
Title: How Policy Gets Made: A Primer
 
Barack Obamas campaign was a model of efficiency and foresightedness. Bill Clinton treated his campaign plans like marketing documents, poll-testing each proposed new idea, and forcing his administration to only begin seriously thinking about what to do once they were in office. Obama, by contrast, started early and put together a series of policy teams even before the campaign had begun in earnest.
 
Each policy team had a different subject  technology, health care, foreign policy  and was led by a top ally or fundraiser in the field. Lets take technology, since its the case Im most familiar with. Julius Genachowski was named Chairman of the Technology, Media and Telecommunications policy working group. Genachowski was a Harvard Law School classmate of Obamas who had gone on to become a chief executive at Barry Dillers IAC/InterActiveCorp (market cap: $2.1 billion). He went on to become a venture capitalist and sit on the board of numerous technology companies.
 
He used his wealth (annual income: $1.6 million) and influence to become the leading Silicon Valley fundraiser for his old classmate  indeed, one of Obamas top fundraisers nationally. As a result, he was the obvious pick to define Obamas technology policy. Genachowski canvassed his fellow Silicon Valley business leaders for policy suggestions and his team synthesized the results into proposed policy documents. These proposals were circulated among a wider circle for further comments before being published on the campaign website.
 
After the election was won, the teams were reassembled as transition teams. Genachowski was again leading the technology team, now named the Technology, Innovation & Government Reform Policy Working Group (TIGR). It was staffed by old government hands, like Thomas Kalil (Deputy Assistant to President Clinton for Technology and Economic Policy, rode out the Bush years as Special Assistant to the Chancellor for Science and Technology at UC Berkeley). Also brought out were business leaders, like Andrew McLaughlin (Head of Global Public Policy and Government Affairs for Google), and business-affiliated academic experts, like Susan Crawford (UMich law professor and a former partner at a DC law firm).
 
The teams worked on converting the policy documents from the campaign into instructions that would be given to federal agencies or executive orders the President could sign. They fleshed out campaign proposals, interviewed potential candidates for government positions, and held audiences with various interest groups. I visited DC during this period and got to see the aforementioned names at DC cocktail parties or the diner outside transition headquarters that became the informal meeting-place of the team. Its the hardest Ive ever worked in my life, Susan Crawford told me, clearly relishing the challenge.
 
After the inauguration, the teams disbanded and their members either returned to private life or were named to the administration. Genachowski, who obviously had his pick of positions, was named chairman of the Federal Communications Commission. Thomas Kalil became Associate Director of Science and Technology Policy. Susan Crawford became Special Assistant to the President for Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy. McLaughlin went back to work at Google, where his connections to the new administration are no doubt invaluable.
 
UPDATE: McLaughlin was named Deptuy CTO
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 17, 2009
 
Okay, Obama had policy teams make up ideas, and yes, some of the people on those teams are now in his administration and others arent but that doesnt tell us how policy gets made, that just tells us that Obamas campaign was more on the ball than Clintons.
 
The real questions are about what they actually wrote up in those drafts, who else had input, how that process actually worked (who are these fellow business leaders? The wider circle? What are their interests? Do those represent the interests of consumers and non-institutionalized content producers?) How will those drafts be changed as they are incorporated into real legislation, and how will that legislation evolve as it works through Congress? What will happen when bills are implemented, and who will be able to influence the implementation? Etc.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
To be clear: all of what youve written here is a great start, but doesnt seem to really get to the root of How Policy Gets Made (this seems more like how people get access to the Presidents early planning proces)itd make a good first section of a more comprehensive Primer on that rather complicated subject.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on May 18, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: May  5, 2009
 
Title: A New Kind of Writing?
 
There are two kinds of nonfiction: science writing and journalism. Science writing is when youre trying to explain an idea. You have a concept in your head and you try to get it across. There are lots of tools you can use to do this: you can give an example, you can tell the story of how you thought of it, you can draw a picture. But the concept is the important thing.
 
In journalism, youre telling a story. Someone did one thing, which led to something else, which led to this other thing. Occasionally you pause to take a step back and make some larger point: the story might have some moral or illustrate some larger principle or lead you to a conclusion. But the important thing is always the story.
 
Of course, this is how science advances. Something weird happened over here, so we measured it carefully and took detailed notes. (These are the experimentalists.) When you put all these weird things together, they kind of fit a larger pattern. (These are the theorists.) The theory then leads to more experiments and the new experiments lead to more theory. You inch forward, bouncing between experiment and theory, journalism and science writing, to a larger understanding of the world.
 
But, of course, just as science requires both, the best science writing requires both. This is what makes This American Lifes show The Giant Pool of Money still so unsurpassedly brilliant. It took a question everyone wanted to know the answer to  why did the economy melt down?  and explained it not by just illustrating the concepts, as many science writers did, or just telling stories of the people involved, as journalists did, but by doing both, moving between the two modes so you could understand not just the theory but how it worked.
 
It seems like an obvious idea, especially when you lay it out this way, but I really cant think of any other good examples. Take three of my very favorite books: Robert Jackalls Moral Mazes, Robert Karens Becoming Attached, and William Foote Whytes _Street Corner Society_1. All are absolutely brilliant, among the best examples of the genre while conveying facts of incredible importance. Jackall is very cinematic: his book consists of well-chosen scenes and all the theory comes in the cuts between them. (As soon as I finished reading it, I wanted to turn it into a movie.) But the two  scenes and theory  exist in a weird sort of balance. Neither of them (with a few exceptions) really take over and drive the work the way both do in The Giant Pool of Money but instead they water each other down: the scenes are always illustrating a theory and the theory consists largely of scenes.
 
Karen embeds the theory within his story by telling the story of the theorys development. Because he does this without condescension, its as good an introduction to the science as can be imagined. Its a very clever technique, and a very powerful one (I certainly wouldnt change it), but its a different one and doesnt have the same power.
 
Whyte, by contrast, spends his book telling the story of one example. From it, he draws out all the important theoretical principles (basically inventing every major branch of sociology for the next century) but the theory is always illustrating his one story, just as Jackalls scenes are always illustrating his theory.
 
Malcolm Gladwell probably comes closest to a genuine mixture of the two, but his work is marred by the fact that he kind of makes up all his science. His stories are never illustrating some established scientific principle or even a new one he has that he wants to stand up to scrutiny, but instead his principles are always invented ad hoc to serve his stories, with the same fidelity a typical This American Life episode has to its theme. As Ira Glass comments on Six Degrees of Lois Weisberg: the article could be half the length and still hit all its big ideas, and its only longer because Gladwell has found so many things that interest and amuse him, and thats the engine that drives the whole enterprise.  pretty much everything in the story after section five is, to my way of thinking, just there for fun.
 
As Ive hinted at before, Im hard at work on a book of my own, and of course I plan to write it this way. But surely I cant be the first. Anyone else have any good examples?
 
UPDATE: Id forgotten how good a book Fast Food Nation is. It follows almost exactly this style. In general, it seems larger books written by magazine writers might, since magazine articles (story, story, moment of reflection) are the building blocks of the form, but Im still having trouble thinking of other examples. Outliers is much better than the other Gladwell books on this front.
 
I wanted to say Robert Caros The Power Broker for the alliteration, but Whyte really is a better example because he doesnt study an extreme outlier.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May  5, 2009
 
I think most of this kind of writing are on historical subjects. Its suited to big juicy concepts.
 
Check out Nehrus Glimpses of World History. Its a collection of letters to his daughter, written while he was in jail, after he formed his political theories but before he got a chance to implement them.
 
Others ah! I.F. Stones The Trial of Socrates. Its a great story and along the way describes a) democratic and autocratic theory, b) the fundamental conflict between the two, c) the uncomfortable agreements between the two, and d) a damned good reason why Socrates deserved it.
 
Another is A History of Knowledge, whose author escapes me. Imagine an editor of encyclopedias taking a whack at all of (Western) knowledge in 400 pages.
 
Youve probably read Sohpies World. It comes close, no?
 
posted by Carlos Bueno
 on May  5, 2009 #
 
http://www.wnyc.org/shows/radiolab/
 
posted by Absconditus
 on May  5, 2009 #
 
I think this moving back and forth was also done a by by James Burkes Connections in its various incarnations (TV, books).
 
posted by PJ
 on May  6, 2009 #
 
Cohen, Stewart and Pratchetts Science of Discworld series use exactly this switching device, though through a fictional context.
 
posted by Carl
 on May  6, 2009 #
 
This model of writing is common in books about education and education reform. The best ones Ive come across were on the topic of women in math and science and they tended to strike a good balance between first-person story telling of various individuals (often children) and facts/statistics about demographics, economics, achievement/testing, graduation rates, etc.
 
If this sounds like the kind of thing you are looking for, Id be happy to pull up some titles/authors.
 
Off the top of my head, I know that Why are There so Few Female Computer Scientists? uses this technique to some extent, but, the overall tone of this is that of a long paper or thesis and not really high-quality non-fiction. But, its easy to find the on the Internet if you wanted to browse over it.
 
posted by Joshua Gay
 on May  7, 2009 #
 
Maybe Im missing something, but I thought this mixing of story and concept is the norm these days. I think a lot of books try to mix story and concept - too many perhaps. In fact, here is my complaint about too many people starting concept books with stories: http://whimsley.typepad.com/whimsley/2007/04/tired_of_anecdo.html.
 
The stories are usually embroidered journalism. Using a fictional story that holds its own as a story (not just to illustrate the point) as part of a book might be more interesting.
 
posted by tom s.
 on May 10, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: April 28, 2009
 
Title: Investigative Strike Teams
 
Journalists get mad at bloggers: Without real reporting, theyd have nothing to comment on! Bloggers get mad at journalists: Theres a reason nobody reads newspapers anymore. Theyre dry and dull and wrong. But the gap is shrinking: bloggers are doing more real reporting, journalists are getting more humanized (with all the digressions, opinions, and biases that entails).
 
So what if you paired an investigative reporter with a blogger? Reporters didnt used to write their own stories. (Why would a good investigator be a good writer?) The reporter would be out in the field, knocking on doors and taking notes, which theyd hand to a writer at a desk, who would turn them into a coherent, vivid story. (Newsweek still operates this way.)
 
Replace the writer with a blogger. Theyd post the story as it unfolded, capturing the excitement of discovery: the big breaks, the wrong turns, the moment when it all comes together. Like any talented blogger, theyd keep people coming back: What happens next? I want to know more! Theyd keep up a conversation with readers and other bloggers, sharing new leads with the reporter. Itd be a powerful duo.
 
But blogging isnt everything. You also want to recap the story so far: for those just tuning in, here are the characters, heres whats happened, heres why its important. Keep a summary article alongside the blog and update it in tandem. It would lay out the whole story in one place, with links to particular posts or source documents for more information. That way everyone can always get an overview of the bigger picture  including the reporters.
 
Youll also want a tech person around to help out. Many stories involve databases; you need someone to work with the reporter to parse and process the data, then work with the blogger to put the results online. And there are plenty of other times where a small program or some tech knowledge comes in handy.
 
And youll need a lawyer on staff. Getting information isnt easy. Youll need someone who can file FOIA lawsuits and respond to legal threats. Maybe you can even file lawsuits against corporate malefactors and obtain documents in discovery. Then work with pro bono lawyers or public interest law firms to win the lawsuit in its own right.
 
Lawsuits are needed because modern investigations cant stop at publication. If there was an era when a front page Times story could stop a scandal, that era is over. Ending abuses requires action. This makes traditional journalists uncomfortable. They see their job as reporting the facts, not changing them.
 
We may always need the detached journalist interested only in The Truth, but theres room for more. Just as journalism needs to become more humanized, it needs to become more activist. Journalists uncover outrageous things, which gets people outraged, but they seem to think channeling that outrage into something productive is someone elses responsibility.
 
Instead, a good investigative team needs a political organizer. They can build an email list of people who get outraged by their reporting and use it, along with blogs and the lists of other political groups, to put pressure on the bad guys, fundraise for further journalism, and collect a team of volunteers. The volunteers can help with aspects of the reporting  a modern investigation can get much further by crowdsourcing certain tricky aspects and depending on talented volunteers for particular tasks. A good political organizer knows how to get and manage volunteers.
 
But to make your organizing maximally effective, youll need (gasp!) a lobbyist. Theyll meet with representatives to encourage them to hold hearings based on stories youre working on, where they can subpoena documents and testimony. Theyll ask representatives to introduce bills to address the abuses youve uncovered and work with them on legislative strategy to get those bills passed. And theyll team up with the political organizer to get constituents writing to their representatives in favor of these bills.
 
The only way to get good at something is deliberate practice: trying various things and seeing how they work. But when it comes to making change, thats very hard to do. Change requires so many people and takes so long that its almost impossible to say for sure that your doing X helped accomplish Y. Which means that it becomes very easy to fool yourself into thinking youre more effective than you are.
 
But if you have one team  some reporters, a blogger/writer, a techie, a lawyer, an organizer, and a lobbyist  together, they form an investigative strike team: uncovering corruption, exposing it, and effecting change. They can watch the whole process unfold from a reporters suspicion to a writers story to a legislative fix. And they can get better at it. Itd be a powerful combination. Thats the kind of future-of-news that I want to see.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 28, 2009
 
Great post Aaron, now lets see it happen! You have the connections/resources, why not you?
 
posted by Andrew
 on April 28, 2009 #
 
This is actually a lot like whats happened with StreetsBlog, the Livable Streets Initiative, StreetFiles, etc. (a series of related initiatives at The Open Planning Project: http://theopenplanningproject.org/focus/transportation/)
 
Probably the biggest initial success for these projects was StreetsBlog, a blog dedicated to the general topic of transportation reform, written by a journalist (professional, full-time).  I dont think theres been anything quite like an investigator, but in addition theres a group producing film (StreetFilms) who do original content.
 
That was working pretty well, but as you mention, informing the public is only a start, it then has to turn into some kind of action.  So theres been efforts, under the name Livable Streets Initiative, to get the community of readers to organize around topics, or share experience organizing locally, research topics (StreetsWiki), etc.
 
Also theres been work to expand into other areas (this all started with a New York City focus), including DC specifically with a federal lobbying focus, in the lead-up to the next federal transportation bill.
 
Weve been calling it Advocacy Blogging, though its scope has increased built on past success.  For us the focus is on the thing being advocated (transportation reform), and the stance is that of an advocate, not a journalist, though with a lot of journalistic sensibilities, which I think is appropriate  advocacy unrestrained is very disrespectful of the readership IMHO.
 
posted by Ian Bicking
 on April 28, 2009 #
 
Aaron, you basically just proposed a small-town newspaper.
 
posted by Jason Scott
 on April 30, 2009 #
 
But if you have one team  some reporters, a blogger/writer, a techie, a lawyer, an organizer, and a lobbyist  together, they form an investigative strike team
 
They also potentially form a dysfunctional group at each others throats for credit when things go right, and blame when things go wrong. :-(
 
Oh, and whos paying for this? Are they all doing it out of the goodness of their hearts? (not sustainable)
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on May  1, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: April 23, 2009
 
Title: Transparency is Bunk
 
Adapted from an impromptu rant I gave to some people interested in funding government transparency projects.
 
Ive spent the past year and change working on a site, watchdog.net, that publishes government information online. In doing that, Ive learned a lot: Ive looked at everything from pollution records to voter registration databases and Ive figured out a number of bureacratic tricks to get information out of the government. But Ive also become increasingly skeptical of the transparency project in general, at least as its carried out in the US.
 
The way a typical US transparency project works is pretty simple. You find a government database, work hard to get or parse a copy, and then put it online with some nice visualizations.
 
The problem is that reality doesnt live in the databases. Instead, the databases that are made available, even if grudgingly, form a kind of official cover story, a veil of lies over the real workings of government. If you visit a site like GovTrack, which publishes information on what Congresspeople are up to, you find that all of Congresss votes are on inane items like declaring holidays and naming post offices. The real action is buried in obscure subchapters of innocuous-sounding bills and voted on under emergency provisions that let everything happen without public disclosure.
 
So government transparency sites end up having three possible effects. The vast majority of them simply promote these official cover stories, misleading the public about whats really going on. The unusually cutting ones simply make plain the mindnumbing universality of waste and corruption, and thus promote apathy. And on very rare occasions you have a success: an extreme case is located through your work, brought to justice, and then everyone goes home thinking the problem has been solved, as the real corruption continues on as before.
 
In short, the generous impulses behind transparency sites end up doing more harm than good.
 
But this is nothing new. The whole history of the good government movement in the US is of reformers who, intentionally or otherwise, weakened the cause of democracy. They too were primarily supported by large foundations, mostly Ford and Rockefeller. They replaced democratically-elected mayors with professional city managers, which required a supermajority to overrule. They insisted on nonpartisan elections, making it difficult to organize people into political blocs. Arguing it would reduce corruption, they insisted city politicians serve without paying, ensuring the jobs were only open to the wealthy.
 
I worry that transparency groups may be making the same mistake.
 
These are some dark thoughts, so I want to add a helpful alternative: journalism. Investigative journalism lives up to the promise that transparency sites make. Let me give three examples: Silverstein, Taibbi, Caro.
 
Ken Silverstein regularly writes brilliant pieces about the influence of money in politics. And he uses these sorts of databases to do so. But the databases are always a small part of a larger picture, supplemented with interviews, documents, and even undercover investigation  he recently did a piece where he posted as a representative of the government of Turkmenistan and described how he was wined and dined by lobbyists eager to build support for that noxious regime. The story, and much more, is told in his book Turkmeniscam. (His book Washington Babylon is similarly indispensible.)
 
Matt Taibbi, in his book The Great Derangement, describes how Congress really works. He goes to the capitol and lays out the whole scene: the Congressmen naming post offices on the House floor, the journalists typing in the press releases theyre handed, the key actions going on behind the scenes and out of the public eye, the continual use of emergency procedures to evade disclosure laws.
 
And Robert Caro, in his incredible book The Power Broker (one of the very best books ever published, Im convinced) takes on this fundamental political question of Whos actually responsible for what my government is doing? For forty years, everyone in New York thought they knew the answer: power was held by the city council, the mayor, the state legislature, and the governor. After all, they run the government, right?
 
And for forty years, they were all wrong. Power was held  held, for the most part, absolutely, without any checks or outside influence   by one man: Parks Commissioner Robert Moses. All that time, everyone (especially the press) treated Robert Moses as merely the Parks Commissioner, a mere public servant serving his elected officials. In reality, he pulled the strings of all those elected officials.
 
These journalists tackled all the major questions supposedly addressed by US transparency sites  whos buying influence? what is Congress doing? whos in power in my neighborhood?  and not only tell a richer, more informative story, but come to strikingly different answers to the questions. In this era where investigative reporting budgets have been cut to the bone and newspapers are folding left and right, its fallen to nonprofits like ProPublica and the Center for Independent Media and, from a previous era, the Center for Public Integrity, to pick up the slack. Theyve been using the Internet in innovative ways to supplement good old-fashioned narrative journalism, where transparency sites are a supplement, rather than an end-in-themselves.
 
For too long weve been funding transparency projects on the model of if-we-build-it-they-will-come: that we dont know what transparency will be useful for, but once its done it will lead to all sorts of exciting possibilities. Well, weve built it. And they havent come. The only success story its proponents can point to is that transparency projects have bred even more transparency projects. Im done working on watchdog.net; Im done hurting America. Its time to give old-fashioned narrative journalism a try.
 
Previously: Disinfecting the Sunlight Foundation [November 2006]
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 23, 2009
 
Now, thats a timely rant.
 
Everybody and their brother seem to be freeing data nowadays, but - for some odd reason - the actual uses (and perhaps even professional evaluation) are then put too far aside.
 
How does your rant add up to what Watchdog is up to currently? Are you looking for journalists, or
 
posted by Tommi
 on April 23, 2009 #
 
Ive always thought that getting the raw data and turning it into a format thats useful was really just the first step. Open government data is a tool to use to solve the problem, but not the solution itself.
 
Once investigative journalists and researchers really figure out how to use those tools effectively, the benefits of opening up the data will spill out.
 
posted by Luigi Montanez
 on April 23, 2009 #
 
What you dont give due attention to here is that improving existing government transparency is part of a larger information ecosystem. Digitizing previously paper-bound and siloed databases makes possible a new kind of connect-the-dots work that used to take investigative journalists months to door they simply didnt even try. Your own project, Watchdog.net, has pioneered a new way of finding links, or handshakes as you called it, between campaign contributors and congressional earmarks, and the demographic data youve cataloged is going to help power new tools for investigative types to answer such questions as How many members of Congress who represent districts where X percent of their households have experienced a foreclosure last year voted for the banking bailout?
 
Were just at the beginning of a new wave of data- and citizen-empowered watchdogging of government, and it would be a huge mistake to discount how valuable these government transparency projects are in opening up the process in fundamentally new ways. Yes, its true that government still wants to hide its dirt and the data it discloses is often only part of the picture. But the more we open access to the existing data and involve people in connecting the dots, the greater the appetite and demand for even more transparency, of the sort even you might find useful.
 
posted by Micah Sifry and Clay Johnson
 on April 23, 2009 #
 
the databases are always a small part of a larger picture, supplemented with interviews, documents, and even undercover investigation
 
This doesnt refute the need for transparency websites.
 
Im not sure if we should ever have expected the general population to visit watchdog websites to help them vote I think the point was to allow investigative journalists to outsource the menial parts of data collection/analysis. That way, those who already have the persistence to do investigative journalism get more of it done, and we lower the barriers to entry to the profession for hobbyists.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on April 23, 2009 #
 
Good rant. I think what Aaron is saying isnt that these sites are not helpful, but that the generous impulses behind transparency sites end up doing more harm than good.
 
So, its the exuberance behind transparency-for-its-own-sake that he takes issue with. Im sure he agrees with all the comments saying transparency is fine as part of a larger movement; I think he just wants to make sure people have the correct expectations of what transparency alone is (and isnt) capable of.
 
posted by Alex
 on April 23, 2009 #
 
Micah and Clay,  Andrey: Then they should be directed by investigative journalists. But I called up the best and they just werent interested in any of the things the sites were doing.
 
posted by 
 on April 23, 2009 #
 
Micah and Clay further argue that transparency leads to more transparency and, doggone it, some of it must be useful.
 
If you believe that, then I have a bridge to sell you. As soon as you disclose anything, you create the incentive to falsify it. More disclosure will only lead to more complicated lies.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 23, 2009 #
 
More disclosure will only lead to more complicated lies.
 
If you believe that, I have some nihilistic hopelessness to sell you.
 
posted by Eric Mill
 on April 23, 2009 #
 
Its a fair point. If we look at corrupt states and not-so-corrupt states, what are the differences? Im willing to bet its not the presence or absence of watchdog websites. Its probably more to do with the structure of how politicians relate to and are bound by their constituents.
 
That doesnt mean watchdog sites are useless. They might still be interesting because they could enable different forms of activism. Theyre just not going to solve corruption on their own.
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on April 23, 2009 #
 
By the way, this recent interview of David Simon, creator of the TV show The Wire, echoes your concerns in one segment. Statistics are always gamed, whether in No Child Left Behind or drug war arrests.
 
However, Simon is a former investigative journalist and he believes that journalism is the mode of discourse which is currently outdated, which has lost its power to outrage or change things.
 
http://www.pbs.org/moyers/journal/04172009/watch.html
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on April 23, 2009 #
 
But transparency is often one part of a larger concept of fostering broader participation in budgetary decision making. This is for the most part still mainly by interest groups that themselves may not be truly representative, but it does create greater focus not just on corruption and awste but also on how budgets reflect the reality of policy deciasions on the ground e.g. you say you support education for the poor - show me where it is in the budget.
 
posted by 
 on April 24, 2009 #
 
Hooray for Aaron Swartz.  To his observations we can add two more:
 
1. Power corrupts open government activists no less than anyone else.
 
With the arrival of the Obama administration the game changed for the big names in open government: suddenly, they had friends on the inside and a leadership (executive and legislative) that took up the rhetoric of open government.  Suddenly they are working closely with a handful of government IT specialists and some legislative offices.
 
This is widely regard as a huge step forward for the cause yet it is anything but that.  Its a disaster for the movement.  It takes the pace and substance of the movement out of their hands and gives political ownership of the movements to the very politicians who should be under scrutiny.
 
At the same time the incoming administration and the Congressional leadership took over the project of even *defining* government transparency, the open government leadership was tossed some bones.  They get to be expert consultants (some of the brightest minds in industry, no doubt).  They get some first-mover advantage setting up or extending existing their own transparency web properties.
 
The movement is at extreme risk of turning into something mostly about itself.
 
2. Journalism is only a small part of the answer.  Organizing is needed, as well.
 
Aaron suggests investigative journalism as a way to cut through the politicization and agenda hoarding that threaten the open government movement.   Certainly, it has a role.
 
What is palpably lacking in the open government movement is a broad base of support in the form of informed demand for transparency.   As a society, we dont have much use for this data.
 
In the hands of demagogues (sometimes calling themselves journalists) isolated snippets of the data - nearly meaningless in their isolation - can be good for evoking and directing outrage at this or that.
 
What we lack, though, is any systematic habit of people self-organizing to examine the facts and then to act upon them in ways that meaningfully impact government.
 
In contrast, around here at least, people know darn well how to organize around the school system or the public transportation system.   Citizen committees spring up like wild-flowers, around these things.  Important hearings and elected official meetings are frequently well attended.  What remains of the local press gives voice to these groups.
 
On federal issues?  Or even state issues?  Not so much.  There is no impressive amount of local organizing at those levels.
 
Creating new transparency web properties is unlikely to change that.   Such sites draw heavily on the technology architectures and business models of commercial web properties and in so doing adopt the form, hence the function, of an asymmetric power arrangement of powerful site owner / operators and a mostly passive consumer audience who, if their input is used for anything at all, it is to be aggregated to further enhance the power advantage of the site owner / operators.
 
It is as if, by shear professional habit, the open government movement made the two successive mistakes of (a) treating government transparency as a category of entertainment;  (b) then not even being especially entertaining compared to, say, demagogue journalists.
 
A telling case in point is surely the recent teabagging protests.   Boy, if ever there was a teaching opportunity to spread the power of transparency tools to grass roots organizers: that was it - yet the open government movement was nowhere apparent in the stories.
 

 
My conclusion from these two problems is that while the open government movement surely must remain engaged with their friends in government that the course there is more or less set for the next few years and little will change it.  Meanwhile, much progress could be made by changing the emphasis from building web site properties to building freely shared tools (IT and social) for meaningful citizen organizing and participation.
 
-t
 
posted by Thomas Lord
 on April 24, 2009 #
 
I posted your interesting and refreshing rant at the GoldTalk.com Forum with added links to the book titles and small editorial annotations  hope you dont mind: http://www.goldtalk.com/forum/report.php?p=237190
 
posted by FastEddy
 on April 27, 2009 #
 
Your article reminds me of Malcolm Gladwells Enron article from a few years ago:
 
http://www.gladwell.com/pdf/opensecrets.pdf
 
Gladwell distinguishes between situations we cant figure out because we dont have enough information, and situations we cant figure out because, even though we have all the right information, we cant distinguish the wheat from the chaff.  He argues that it was possible to deduce Enrons actual condition from public financial records, but that few tried or were able to, and most believed the cover story that ran along the surface of what the company disclosed.
 
I wouldnt call Malcolm Gladwell an investigative reporter, but he might as well have been talking about exactly what youre saying here.
 
posted by Nat Friedman
 on April 28, 2009 #
 
The direction Ive always envisioned for OpenCongress (http://opencongress.org) is one where constituents monitor and direct the activities of their representatives.
 
Data always seemed like an obvious first step, because its easy and hard to argue with (though this post does a good job).
 
But the goal is creating communities with enough weight to push government around on anything important (including steps to undermine structural corruption).
 
Maybe controlcongress.org would be a better name (its taken).
 
posted by Holmes Wilson
 on April 28, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: April 15, 2009
 
Title: A Non-Local Revolution
 
Paul Graham has recently argued for two points: first, that tech startups will continue to collect in Silicon Valley. Second, that startups may represent a new economic phase, replacing the corporate ladder of old. Now hes suggesting that these two effects combined might lead to a very local economic revolution.
 
The first point  that tech startups collect in Silicon Valley  is certainly true, just like car companies all tend to cluster in Detroit. This is because of a feedback effect set off by some random initial condition: Shockley Semiconductor was started in Silicon Valley, so when its employees left to start their own companies they did so there, and so on. Now everyone in the industry moves to Silicon Valley because thats where everyone else is.
 
This isnt a new idea; it was a central topic in Paul Krugmans research, for example, and even before that you can see similar ideas expressed by social theorists like Jane Jacobs. (For more information, see the Wikipedia article Business cluster, Krugmans Geography and Trade, and Jacobs brilliant book The Economy of Cities.) Industries tend to cluster together.
 
The second  that startups represent a new economic phase  may also be true. Its a rather more extreme claim, but it would be pretty cool.
 
But I dont think it combines with the first to create a local revolution. Its true, tech startups have generated a lot of wealth, but theyre far from the only kind of startup to do so. The amazing thing about the Internet is that it makes all sorts of startups possible.
 
Previously, if you wanted to start a newspaper, you had to buy a building and hire a staff and get some printing presses and a delivery service and an ad sales team and access to the wire services. Now you just start a blog, read the wire services online, and link to the stories you like.
 
Previously, if you wanted to sell a new kind of soap, you had to build warehouses and a distribution network and a shipping infrastructure and make deals with retail outlets. Now you have Amazon Fulfillment Services handle all the physical details and just advertise your product on the Web.
 
And new startups are helping this process along all the time. One Y Combinator startup tries to make things easier for food producers, another helps you run an online magazine. More are surely close behind.
 
Its tempting to think that a soap company which only sold through the Internet would always be a small concern. But why should it be any different from Internet companies? Reddit was small when it started, but it quickly grew through word-of-mouth. Sure, we had some tough nights making things scale, but in the end we were able to ramp up to a site with millions of users.
 
Similarly, I met some folks in Brooklyn who started a small salsa company in their apartment. At first they made the salsa in their kitchen and sold jars through their bedroom window. As business picked up, they got a bigger space and started selling more. Now theyre manufacturing in scale and you can find them at Whole Foods. This worked because New York City was a big enough audience that they had room to scale up. The Internet is big in exactly the same way.
 
As the Internet is everywhere and everyone knows how to use it, why wont we see online startups in every industry? And then why not all across the globe? It may make sense for tech startups to move to Silicon Valley, but does it really make sense for soap startups? For food startups? No, it seems more likely that each industry will cluster the way tech companies and car companies have.
 
Silicon Valley may have had the first wave, but the next one belongs to the world.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 15, 2009
 
At first they made the salsa in their kitchen and sold jars through their bedroom window
 
Is that legal?
 
posted by David N. Welton
 on April 15, 2009 #
 
Now you just start a blog, read the wire services online, and link to the stories you like.
 
Except that a blog isnt a newspaper by any stretch of the imagination, and cant be, without some of the same efforts at real journalism. (Not that papers are doing a great job of that these days, either)
 
posted by Chris Ryland
 on April 15, 2009 #
 
What Chris Ryland said. This post is a bit evangelistic, though its understandable given your background and experiences.
 
why wont we see online startups in every industry?
 
Because not every industry is a pure information product.
 
Note you may see online startups trying to service every industry - and thats of course ample fodder for the marketers and hucksters who prey in the environment - but thats hardly the total economy.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on April 15, 2009 #
 
Interesting take. Which YC company aims to help you run an online magazine?
 
posted by Matt Wolf
 on April 16, 2009 #
 
I think this is likely to happen most at the hyperlocal scale: decentralizing local commerce rather than intercity commerce.  Let me explain.
 
Here in Buenos Aires, there is a district several blocks long that consists about 50% of (the local equivalent of) pawn shops; theres another district that consists of stores that sell water pumps and large electric motors.  Around the corner from me are three TV remote-control stores  across the street from each other.  Galera Jardn downtown has about 40 good computer shops with decent prices; the rest of the city has essentially none.
 
Why does this happen here and not anyplace I lived in the US?  I suspect that its because the Yellow Pages is terrible.  My 20062007 edition is only 1056 pages  for a city of 3 million with 10 million more in the suburbs, most of whom work in the City.  So people cant let their fingers do the walking  they do it the old-fashioned way, with their feet.  So physical proximity to the people who might refer customers to you is imperdible.  (And the city is huge, 79 square miles, 60% bigger than Bostons land area, and similarly difficult parking and heavily trafficked streets.  So physical proximity matters a lot.)
 
But people who sell on MercadoLibre (the local eBay clone, part owned by eBay since 2001) run their businesses in any old place in the city, where rent is cheaper.  I bought a wireless AP on MercadoLibre from a company in the back of an apartment building in a residential neighborhood.  The metal door leading from the apartment buildings lobby into the store was opaque and had no signs; I had to knock and tell them who I was and what I was there for in order to enter.  (Once inside, it was much like any other electronics store.)  Many of their buyers dont come to pick up the goods in person; instead they are delivered by motorcycle courier.
 
A couple of years ago, Beatrice bought luxury sheets for a hotel we were housesitting.  The place she bought them didnt sell on MercadoLibre, but they get their business through word of mouth, so the entryway is quite similar.  Our accountants office, our immigration lawyers offices, and the place where some friends and family members recently edited a feature film are all similarly nondescript, often on the fourth floor of some unlabeled building or something.
 
There are any number of restaurants, nightclubs, bars, and so on here that are similarly nondescript  they operate in somebodys house, or in a space that looks like an ordinary house from the outside but is a fully outfitted restaurant or whatever on the inside.  They get their business by word-of-mouth and advertising online, rather than from people walking by.
 
Now, I suspect that some of this nondescriptness is defensive in nature, rather than merely a result of finding business through non-physical-proximity channels.  Some of these businesses are not properly licensed (my company is very unusual here in Buenos Aires by attempting to do everything legally, which has cost us roughly a year of no income so far) and others want to avoid being targeted for armed robbery.
 
So I think many of the ordinary physical features of business to which we have become accustomed  storefronts, signs, logos on buildings, business districts, malls, galeras, and the like  are essentially informational in nature.  Their purpose is to make it easier for customers or suppliers to gain the information they need in order to conduct transactions.  As this information becomes more easily available, we can expect demand to dry up for location, location, location, for a larger and larger range of businesses.
 
So thats how I think the internet will change the locations of businesses that sell physical goods.  It doesnt make it any easier to ship the goods; FedEx and the transition to intermodal transport unit containers did that in the 1970s, and the gradual reduction of trade barriers on physical goods has been doing that since then.  It will make it easier to find goods, which will drastically reshape our downtowns and will diversify the available goods by quite a bit, but I dont think it will dramatically increase the number of people mail-ordering soap or dishes from other cities.
 
Maybe Im wrong though.
 
(And this is before the widespread availability and standardization of automated fabrication.)
 
posted by Kragen Javier Sitaker
 on April 18, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: April 14, 2009
 
Title: What Are Intellectuals Good For?
 
There was once an era where great men strode among us. The Intellectuals, as they were known, had an opinion on everything and would share it, at length, with elegance and verve. Unfortunately, the explosion of information beginning in the sixties rendered them all-but-extinct and the electronic transformation of the past few decades threatens to finish the job. Still, we cant but admire them and their milieu.
 
This certainly seems to be George Scialabbas position. The greatest working book reviewer  when the National Book Critics Circle inaugurated their Excellence in Criticism award, he was their first recipient  collects his reviews of these grand mens work and a sampling of his own in his new collection, What Are Intellectuals Good For? The result is a delightful introduction to this world of ideas.
 
Scialabbas own position is best summarized by his dedication: For Chomsky, Rorty, Lasch. In other words, he is a man of impeccable left-wing politics, a refusal to believe in any philosophical verities, and a deep skepticism about the benefits of Enlightenment progress. This is not exactly a popular combination  surely Chomsky and Ehrenreich have more fans than Rorty and Lasch  but it is a provocative one. And Scialabbas genius is that he can make such counterintuitive ideas, expressed by such Olympian intellectuals, seem not just clear but common sense. A dedicated follower of the left-rationalist-progressive tradition, I had to continually catch myself from nodding along in agreement.
 
Recommended for anyone whos a fan of the Intellectual Scene and the men and women who inhabit it.
 
Disclosure: Scialabba sent me an inscribed copy of the book.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 14, 2009
 
Intellectuals arent necessarily worth more than the average person.  But some intellectuals have another characteristic, and when intellectualism and this characteristic are combined they ultimately lead to great things, not just for that person, but for humanity.  That characteristic is compassion.
 
I find that intellectuals with compassion tend to think in a way that involves the bettering of humanity, not just how they can make a million dollars.  So while the average intellectual is just as worthless as most corporate businessmen, the compassionate intellectual is the one that will change the world.
 
posted by Ibrahim | ZenCollegeLife.com
 on April 17, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: April 13, 2009
 
Title: The Logic of Loss
 
Imagine someone offered you a 1% chance of winning a million dollars. How much would you pay for it? The natural inclination would be to say you break even at 1% of a million, which is $10,000. Even if you could scrape together the cash, this doesnt seem like a very good deal. After all, theres a 99% chance that youll have just thrown away ten grand.
 
Where did we go wrong? The problem is that calculating the average value this way only makes sense if you get to take the deal enough times to expect an average result. If you bought a couple thousand of these chances at $9000 each, then you might start to come out ahead. But buying just one doesnt seem very bright.
 
Of course, the same logic applies to more pedestrian examples of risk. It probably doesnt make sense to invest in just one startup, even if the returns on startups are huge. Thats why VCs invest in large numbers of startups; the returns from the wins balance out the flops.
 
This should seem pretty obvious, but some people seem to forget it a lot. Take the St. Petersburg paradox. Imagine this game: A dollar is placed on the table and a coin is flipped. If the coin comes up heads, the money is doubled and the coin is flipped again. Tails, the game ends and you take the money. How much would you pay to play?
 
The paradox comes about because the naive answer here is infinite. Theres a 50% chance you get a dollar (=fifty cents), a 25% chance you get 2 (another fifty cents), a 12.5% chance you get 4 (again), and so on infinitely. But, naturally, it seems insane to pay a fortune to play this game. Thus the paradox.
 
Folks seem to be genuinely stumped about this, but its just the first offer taken to the limit: instead of a 1% chance of making a million, you have an infinitesimal chance of making an infinity. If you got to play the game an infinite number of times, shelling out cash might begin to make sense, but if you only play it once its not worth much.
 
Keep that in mind next time someone offers you a game.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 13, 2009
 
Likewise, playing the lottery can actually make sense from this perspective.  When the loss is incremental and more or less inconsequential but winning would change your life in ways that cant be simply extrapolated from what would happen if you were given a small windfall, its not necessarily illogical.
 
posted by Sage Ross
 on April 13, 2009 #
 
I have always wondered why economists always use the repeated tries case to determine what the rational price is. Are they just always assuming a liquid market for many similar risks and an infinite lifespan? It doesnt seem to work in real life.
 
Usually, for those high-risk high-reward payoffs you get only one or two such chances in a lifetime. You have to be AIG or something to collect so much risk in one place (hmmm).
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on April 13, 2009 #
 
There is an excellent book that expans on this concept, Fortunes Formula, which was written by William Poundstone.  Amazon.
 
posted by Jake Walker
 on April 13, 2009 #
 
As you might be aware, Semyon Dukach, of MIT blackjack fame, attributes the cause of the economic crisis to something related to the St. Petersburg paradox. He has a full explanation on his blog.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on April 13, 2009 #
 
The main issue at play here is the non-constant value of a dollar. Your millionth dollar is far less valuable than your first.
Your first $1000 buys you the food you need to live. Your thousandth $1000 buys you another ivory back-scratcher.
So yes, it doesnt make much sense for a middle-class person to buy the $9000 lottery ticket. But its a great deal for someone with $20 million in the bank.
 
posted by Steve Downing
 on April 14, 2009 #
 
Yeah, youve unknowingly perhaps hit upon one of the unresolved philosophical issues from an earlier era (back when probability and statistics were still being worked out in earnest).
 
Its obvious that for a game you can play many times that you should choose to play if the expected value is positive and should choose not to play if the expected value is negative.
 
It was never, ever obvious that in the case where you can only play once that the expected value criterion was justifiable.
 
There were actually lengthy debates back and forth over this, but eventually it was settled in favor of the expected value criterion, where I put settled in quotes b/c the argument just pooped outno sensible alternative criterion for single-round games was ever devised, and in the absence of a sensible alternative everyone just uses the expected value criterion along with some personal heuristics for when not to use it.
 
Youll notice today that even many people who get the underlying issue  that for a one-off decision theres no great decision strategy, although expected value criterion is best-of-the-worst  tend to not appreciate the actual problem.
 
Ill pick on Steve Downing, b/c hes making the usual mistake.
 
The decision algorithm is like:
 
step 1: calculate the expected utility of the action A, E[U]
 
step 2: equate utility of taking action A with E[U]
 
step 3: apply the criterion that E[U] > 0 => YES otherwise NO
 
Step 2 is actually the problematic one  its the step that is arguably unjustified, but for which theres no better idea.
 
What Downing is proposing looks at first glance like it solves the problem: it provides an explanation for why we have an intuitive reaction contra taking the +EV but 99.99% chance of 0 bet.
 
However, its not actually addressing step 2  the step wherein you equate utility of taking the bet with the expected value of the bet; its assuming step 2 is unproblematic and is just tweaking U so that step 3 yields more-intuitive results.
 
posted by as
 on April 15, 2009 #
 
Or you could just do an engineering solution as you do in reinforcement learning, just increasingly discount each successive term. Theres no mathematical justification, just that it makes the numbers come out. Its sort of hand-waved as a time preference, well you want the reinforcement earlier, similar to Steve Downings idea.
 
posted by Snapping Turtle
 on April 15, 2009 #
 
Steve D makes a critical point that I think youre missing here: For any given individual, the value of money is not constant.
 
If I find $0.10, Im unlikely to bother picking it up (i.e., because Im lucky enough to be a US citizen and a computer programmer, an unrepeatable dime is noise to me).
 
If its $1, I toss it in my glove box to make life simpler when fumbling for change at the next drive-through.
 
$10stick it in my wallet.
 
$100maybe take the family out to dinner, or just stick it in my wallet.
 
$1,000.  Almost enough to be interesting.  Stick it in the checking account.
 
$10,000.  This might mean going on vacation this year when we otherwise wouldnt.  Otherwise, stick it in the retirement account or maybe give it to UNICEF.
 
$100,000.  Not enough to quit my day job.  Probably pay off the mortgage and keep pedaling.  Oddly, though, though its a lot of money, it probably doesnt have a noticeable effect on my life.  (I actually sort of had this happen once.  I got one of Linux thank you allotments from RedHat when they IPOed, and if Id been smart enough to sell at the top, it would have netted me something like this.  I was loyal (i.e., stupid :-) though, and rode the stock most of the way down.)
 
$1,000,000.  This is huge.  Fuck yeah.  At this level, I quit my day job and work all day long on software I believe will actually benefit society.  (Actually, this is so much that probably more than half goes to UNICEF when I die.)
 
$10,000,000.  Same as above, only UNICEF gets $9,000,000 immediately.
 
$100,000,000.  Sambe as above, only I probably spend a considerable amount of time doing the diligence to make sure that $99,000,000 is really doing good in the world.
 
Etc.
 
The point here is that this is tremendously non-linear, and also non-monotonic.
 
Sums in the neighborhood of $400,000 or so would be very valuable to me (or so it appears) in the sense of changing my life.  Much less and its not a noticeable amount.  Much more and its also not really noticeable, other than adding the nice feeling one can get from giving away a lot of money.
 
So, what should you do with a billion dollars, if we (unaccountably) stipulate that it has to be given to Americans?  You could give every American $4, and they all get a candy bar or two.  Yay.  Or you could make 10 people nearly as rich.  Yay.
 
Or you can change several thousand peoples lives.
 
posted by Mike C
 on April 16, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March 24, 2009
 
Title: Margo Seltzer
 
part of Ada Lovelace Day
 
Margo Ilene Seltzer was born in rural, upstate New York. I like to describe it as a place with more cows than people, she later told an interviewer. In her small town, she excelled in math and science, but wasnt sure that this would translate when she began attending Harvard for college in 1979.
 
Graduating in 1983, she studied Applied Mathematics, with a computer science concentration. She took some time to work in industry before going to graduate school in Computer Science at Berkeley in 1988. Her dissertation, completed in 1992, was on File System Performance and Transaction Support and found that, due to the costs of garbage collection in most real-world uses, log-structured filesystems in the literature were not any faster than read-optimized filesystems.
 
At the time, Berkeleys CS department was excitedly developing BSD, writing free replacements for all the Unix utilities. They needed a replacement for ndbm, the prominent Unix database manager, and hsearch, its hash search function, and Margo had just finished taking a database course. She decided to apply her new skills by writing hash for BSD. Someone else wrote btree and they both ended up getting packaged together as db185, which shipped with BSD 4.4.
 
BerkeleyDB, as it became known, was used in many places but among them was the University of Michigan LDAP server. Netscape built upon this server for their own directory product but found that since bsddb didnt support transactions, multiple concurrent writes could lead to corrupted data. They noticed that Margo had once written a paper on the subject of adding transactions and gave her a call. It was 1996.
 
She said that it was simply academic work and wasnt ready for use in production. They asked if she could get it ready for production. They could pay, they reminded her. It was the first time shed ever done anything like this for pay, but she gathered together some friends and founded a company to make the product for Netscape. They relicensed it from BSD (which allows anyone to integrate it) to their own GPL-style license which would allow them to continue to separately charge Netscape for using it. Their company was called Sleepycat, and Margo was its CTO.
 
The company was a major success, with BerkeleyDB being used in everything from SQL databases to behind-the-scenes at Amazon and Google. In 2006, as Oracle was acquiring all the open source database companies, they acquired Sleepycat and Margo went to work for Oracle.
 
At the same time, however, she was pursuing a parallel career in academia. In 1992 she became an Assistant Professor of Computer Science at Harvard. She became an Associate Professor in 1997, was named Gordon McKay Professor in 2000 and received tenure, occasioning a Crimson editorial on how a woman beat all the odds. From 2002 to 2006, she was also Associate Dean. A widely-respected professor in the field, shes published over a hundred papers and served on numerous committees.
 
She is also noted as an inspiring teacher. She received two awards, Roslyn Abramson and Phi Beta Kappa, for excellence in teaching. And her course receives a 4.9 out of 5 in student ratings. Computer science students around campus often remark with surprise at how open and welcoming she is to young students as such a famous and respected professor.
 
Nor has she sacrificed her family, taking her children with her to the office and reserving time to spend with them at home.
 
A standout in so many ways, it seems the one struggle left is finding a new struggle. Now that the pressures off, she told a reporter, Ive started to ask myself: Whats my next goal? I won my black belt in karate a year ago. Ive got tenure, a wonderful family, and a thriving business. Its time to figure out whats next.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 24, 2009
 
Did you mean for college in 1979? Excellent profile otherwise.
 
posted by Yan
 on March 24, 2009 #
 
Oh my GOD yes, how could I have forgotten? Spent an evening with her at Usenix 2000 learning how to be a working mother
 
posted by Yatima
 on March 25, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March 23, 2009
 
Title: Who Really Rules?
 
Who Really Rules?, by G. William Domhoff, is one of my very favorite books. But explaining why will take some background. In the 1950s and 60s researchers were looking at what they called the power structure in American cities  the people who really pulled the strings and called the shots. Foremost among them was Floyd Hunter, whose study of Atlanta practically invented the field. Naturally the whole notion that anyone was pulling the shots behind the scenes in America offended the deans of mainstream liberal political science and so their leader, Robert A. Dahl, set out to defend democracys good name.
 
He argued that one could only figure out who was in charge by doing careful case studies  looking at controversial decisions and seeing who was involved in making them  that and only that could tell you where true power lay. And, in his most famous work, Who Governs?: Democracy and Power in an American City he aimed to do just such a case study in his hometown of New Haven, where his employer, Yale University, resides.
 
Dahl proposed a theory called pluralism in which no small elect is in charge but power is instead shared across conflicting groups, each marshaling its own resources on the issues it feels strongly about. Democracy, although perhaps in a more sophisticated form, is vindicated, and the ridiculous notions of a shadowy elite disproven. As Dahl writes:
 
It is all the more improbable, then, that a secret cabal of Notables dominates the public life of New Haven through means so clandestine that not one of the fifty prominent citizens interviewed in the courts of this studycitizens who had participated extensively in various decisionshinted at the existence of such a cabal; so clandestine, indeed, that no clues turned up in several years of investigation led to the door of such a group. (185)
 
Of course that wasnt quite true. Domhoff was skeptical of Dahls results and decided to request access to his source material and reresearch the matter for himself. In going through Dahls interview notes, Domhoff found these choice comments:
 
First Informant said that [contacting the First National Bank] was essential, that they had to deal with what he called the power structure if they wanted to accomplish anything. First Informant kept emphasizing the power structure.
 
According to Second Informant, nothing gets done without the First National Bank saying so. According to him, it is at the top of the power structure.  I asked him why  [and he] said, Just look at whos on its board of directors.  He said, The banks support is necessary for anything that is done in this town including redevelopment. (Sounds like a quote from Hunter.)
 
But, of course, Dahl wanted to disprove Hunter, not sound like him, so he never followed up on these leads. But Domhoff does. In the intellectual battle over which version of how cities work is more accurate, he scores a decisive victory over Dahl. He not only takes Dahls method, he also takes Dahls town and indeed his specific case study and shows how the decisions were made by a sinister cabal after all.
 
And his results are much more convincing. Dahl, after all, was trying to prove a negative: that there wasnt anyone pulling the strings. Whereas Domhoff can simply point out who was. Dahls central case study is the question of New Haven urban renewal. A bold Democratic mayor, he claims, came into office and proposed a plan, dragging local businessmen and Federal officials along with him to get it done.
 
Nonsense, says Domhoff. The plan for urban renewal was drafted by the local chamber of commerce years before. And when the new mayor got elected, the Chamber of Commerce invited him to lunch and explained the whole thing. They even told the mayor who to hire to carry the plan out and, in the end, got exactly what theyd wanted all along.
 
But Domhoff doesnt simply prove Dahl wrong. He gives an engrossing case study of how powerful businessmen get things like this done, based on extensive archival research and contemporaneous notes. And he tells an entire alternative history of American urban renewal, showing how big business turned a plan to build housing for the poor into an excuse to expel them to make room for upscale businesses.
 
The result is a tour de force: a complete demolition of one of the most influential books of political science, an engrossing case study of how power really operates, and an example of how to do research into the people who, after all, really rule.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 23, 2009
 
What persons/organizations constitute the cabal that gave us our current leadership, i.e. Obama and the Democratic Legislature?
 
posted by frint frinterson
 on March 23, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March 16, 2009
 
Title: Journalistic Capture and Fixing CNBC
 
Attention conservation notice: Just Fix CNBC! and add your name.
 
Sometimes the government will set up a new regulatory agency, like a Mine Safety and Health Administration or something to keep watch on the mining industry. And off they go, investigating the mining industry to make sure theyre being safe.
 
Only something funny happens. It turns out all the people they talk to all day are mining industry officials. And whenever they hold meetings to ask for advice, the only people who show up are mining industry officials. When they make proposals and ask for public comment, all the comments are from mining industry officials. And pretty soon, they start thinking like mining industry officials.
 
Academics call this regulatory capture  an office was put in place to regulate an industry, but it ended up just being a tool of the industry.
 
But whats striking is that the problem isnt just limited to regulation; the same thing happens to journalists as well. Call it journalistic capture. And there are few examples of it more obvious than that of CNBC.
 
CNBC, a channel supposed to cover economic news, basically acts as a full-time cheerleader for the financial industry. When the market was booming, this wasnt so noticeable. Whole swaths of the country started daytrading and checking the CNBC ticker regularly to feed their buy-sell trigger fingers.
 
But now that the markets gone belly-up, it all seems a whole lot less appealing. Which is what Jon Stewart has been getting at with his critiques of the network.
 
Well, its less satisfying to complain when you can actually do something about it, so some friends and I have started a new campaign: Fix CNBC! As HuffPo reported, were demanding CNBC commit to holding Wall Street accountable, starting with hiring someone who was right about the economic crisis.
 
Wed really love for you to sign our open letter:
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 16, 2009
 
I applaud your efforts, but I doubt this campaign, even if it succeeds in getting CNBC to hire more trustworthy and knowledgeable analysts with proven track records, will really change CNBC or the large problem of journalistic capture in the general media.  If anything, it would serve as a short term PR boost for CNBC as they signal that they do care, but once the heat is off, they will revert back to what makes the most financial sense for them, not their audience.
 
Since you are close with Larry Lessig, and no doubt are aware of his Change Congress initiative, have you thought of solutions along similar lines applied to this problem?  Lessig correctly identified a deeper root cause of the problems of government to be systemic corruption caused by the politicians need to raise finances for re-election and thus becoming indebted to their benefactors.
 
So then a deeper root cause of journalistic capture would be the networks reliance on ad dollars and the most lucrative target audiences, who dont really care about thoughtful insight or unbiased truth.
 
posted by haig
 on March 16, 2009 #
 
Ive been grumbling to Dan Gillmor about this general issue for a while. The problem is theres no  incentive to be accurate, as opposed to being a crowd-following booster. And then if you are evangelizing a system which celebrates the destruction of any sort of journalistic institution, in favor of pure attention-grabbing monetization of eyeballs by advertising, thats going to make the problem enormously worse.
 
Unfortunately, theres no money in saying this, so it looks like Im wasting my time :-(.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on March 19, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March  9, 2009
 
Title: In Defense of Elections
 
Traditional left-wing thought treats elections as epiphenomenal: build a strong enough social movement and politicians will be forced to do what you want. In this view, it doesnt really matter who gets elected since theyre ultimately all subject to the same structural forces. Working to get someone good elected is really just a waste of time, since theyll turn out to be as bad as all the others once they get into office.
 
(Think Noam Chomskys comments about the unimportance of electoral politics, or the Alinskyite theory that one should try to cultivate an attitude of fear and loathing among politicians.)
 
Theres clearly a great deal of truth to this  structural forces are ultimately very powerful. But I think it misses a great deal as well. This model assumes politicians are this separate class of rational actors who respond purely to electoral incentives; if your grassroots movement gets them votes, theyll help you out, but theyre just as happy to sell you out to a higher bidder.
 
But what if the politicians involved are actually activists themselves? What if the choice isnt between joining a electoral campaign and joining an issue campaign, but between starting a electoral campaign and starting an issue campaign? Here I think the calculus changes wildly.
 
For one thing, just at the campaign level, electoral campaigns have a lot of advantage over issue campaigns. They fit into a designated news hole so its easier for the media to cover them, they have clear deadlines which spur people to action, and theres a clear existing model for how to do them (including fundraising, scheduling, volunteer management, etc.).
 
Furthermore, if you actually win, you can now continue the campaign from a much stronger institutional base: youll have a full-time salaried staff, your pronouncements will be de facto news, and there will be strong social pressure preventing the whole thing from fizzling out as people decide to do other things with their lives.
 
Of course, theres also the positive impact you can make as an officeholder. Obviously youll be able to help institutionalize your goals by passing laws and regulations you support (just as you would try to push as an outsider), but youll also be able to promote things in innumerable smaller ways, just by meeting with other politicians and using the influence of your office. Take this story from Matt Taibbi about Bernie Sanders, the socialist Senator from Vermont:
 
[He] kept coming back to a story about his very first meeting with the Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee. At the meeting, the subject of the Head Start program had come up. Ted Kennedy, who runs the committee, had proposed a modest increase. Sanders wanted moreso he went and had a word with Kennedy after the meeting.
 
The end result is that we got a 6 percent increase, instead of a 4 percent increase, he said. Over a three-year period, thats five hundred million dollars more. What Im finding out is its just a different world. Not saying its better, its just different. If you want something you just go talk to someone in the hall. []
 
He tried to sound like it was a good thing, and it might very well have been, in terms of getting more money for a worthy-enough program. But the subtext of this story was Sanders expressing amazement that he could get $500 million just by talking to someone. As any human being would, he looked blown away by the reality of his situation.
 
(The Great Derangement, 127)
 
Obviously there are few offices as powerful as United States Senator, but every job has opportunities for simple victories like these, if at a much smaller scale. Sure, outside groups can always try to push officials to do things like this, but if you actually are the elected official you can just do them. (Plus, how often do outside groups know about these simple things?)
 
The late Senator Paul Wellstone, who came to electoral politics from grassroots organizing himself, argued that political change had three parts: the intellectual work of discovering whats wrong and how to fix it (i.e. policy development), the organizing work of mobilizing citizens into activist groups, and the electoral work of running for office and getting elected. And it seems that the left seems to neglect the last of these.
 
For a young leftist, a career in academia or the think tanks is an easy choice, while those who are bolder go into full-time activism. But running for office never seems like a viable option. (When people ask Noam Chomsky how they can fix things, he never says they should run for office.) (Well ignore for a moment the delusion the left seems to have that they should run for office as a third-party in a two-party system.) The result is a severe deficit of genuine leftist candidates. Which of course feeds their sense that politicians are just going to sell you out.
 
Leftists need to think more about running for office. Not as an alternative to advocacy or activism, but as an extension of it. Campaigns are an incredible opportunity to explain and fight for the issues you believe in, while elected offices are a great opportunity to achieve them. Thats how the left took Santa Cruz, probably the only real city in the country with a leftist government, and thats how theyll take the country.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March  9, 2009
 
I have mixed feelings about this: for all the occasions when someone has gotten something done thanks to their elected position, you could no doubt come up with many examples of how the constraints inherent in the way the system runs make getting significant changes not possible.
 
Just one specific point for now, though:
 
Well ignore for a moment the delusion the left seems to have that they should run for office as a third-party in a two-party system.
 
Well Bernie Sanders runs as an independent socialist, even though he caucuses with the Democrats, so perhaps the lesson should, you can get elected as a third-party candidate if you have the activist history and mass support to do it.
 
Cheers. Always an interesting column.
Simon
 
posted by Simon
 on March  9, 2009 #
 
You need also consider the different skill sets involved in these different tasks. An effective analyst may not be an effective organizer may not be an effective legislator  or politician. Im on board with your fundamental point, but in many cases the solution may be bringing new people with appropriate skill sets into the movement, rather than re-tasking the existing ones.
 
posted by Adam Kessel
 on March  9, 2009 #
 
So either youre saying that Berkeley, with 100,000+ people, isnt a real city while Santa Cruz (pop. 54,000+) isor that Berkeley doesnt have a leftist government?
 
That strikes me as a pretty stringent definition of leftist. And one that is, frankly, unlikely to take over the country.
 
posted by walt crawford
 on March  9, 2009 #
 
Aaron: have you considered running for office yourself?
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on March 10, 2009 #
 
I think this is because there is a (probably correct) perception that politics requires a conservative personal history, even if youre a progressive in principle. Lefties have a lot more weird shit in their personal life than conservatives. Ive never considered politics as an option because my life would look like a construction of sexual scandals to a lot of people, even though in my current life Im not particularly ashamed of it.
 
posted by quinn
 on March 11, 2009 #
 
On the socialist left this is often known as the debate between
parliamentary (or electoral) socialism/communism and extra- or
anti-parliamentary socialism. Chomsky comes out of the
anarchist/anti-parliamentary tradition, so it makes sense for him to
argue against running for office. Debs was probably the last gasp of
American parliamentary socialism.
 
I am interested that you seem to assume that the anti-electoral
tradition is stronger in the US than the pro-electoral tradition.
Although no party has had much success in the past 80 years, before
that the Socialist Party of America had a number of successes,
including the long-time governance of Milwaukee. And since then, the
primary activity of the left (outside of single-issue or protest
politics) has been electoral: the Green Party, the Peace & Freedom
Party (in Ca.), the Socialist Workers Party, the Socialist Party of
America, the Socialist Labor Party, the CPUSA, etc. And certainly
outside of the US the left has generally leaned towards electoral
politics. So, generally, electoral politics has generally been
stronger on the left that anti-electoral politics.
 
In any case, under your assumptions it does clearly follow that having
allies in office would be enormously beneficial. Even though the
business class is enormously powerful, congress has an enormous amount
of power. A principled person could certainly do a lot of good there.
 
The anti-parliamentary argument usually has a number of points: the
corrupting aspects of power, the amount of promises which are by
necessity made in order to gain election (and which must be
fulfilled), the huge amount of money & effort which is necessary to
get even one person elected to congress (and which could be directed
elsewhere).
 
I think the anti- tradition is more convincing. Besides anarchists,
who have always argued against electoralism, if youd like to read
critiques of electoralism, you should have a look at authors like Paul
Mattick, Maurice Brinton, and Anton Pannekoek, and the traditions of
Council or Left Communism, which have a long history and come from the
marxist left.
 
posted by Erik
 on March 18, 2009 #
 
Activists can represent an issue.  In the US, legislators represent a district or a state.
 
In parliaments with proportional representation, officeholders can represent an issue too.  In the US, that can only happen if the issue is overridingly important to the voters of the area being represented.
 
posted by Kragen Javier Sitaker
 on March 18, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March  5, 2009
 
Title: The Intellectuals Creed
 
[T]he ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly understood. Indeed the world is ruled by little else. Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back. I am sure that the power of vested interests is vastly exaggerated compared with the gradual encroachment of ideas. Not, indeed, immediately, but after a certain interval; for in the field of economic and political philosophy there are not many who are influenced by new theories after they are twenty-five or thirty years of age, so that the ideas which civil servants and politicians and even agitators apply to current events are not likely to be the newest. But, soon or late, it is ideas, not vested interests, which are dangerous for good or evil.
 
(John Maynard Keynes, General Theory, last page)
 
Previously: The Activists Creed, The Sociologists Creed
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March  5, 2009
 
The Intellectuals decline:
http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=uX-ojZEnWN4C&dq=The+Decline+of+the+Intellectual&printsec=frontcover&source=bl&ots=OvW3a3V6Y2&sig=AaOF639ytuBq2xVXkHdCPmljalE&hl=en&ei=3uWvSbDfOOLEjAfd3Y3PBQ&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=2&ct=result#PPR7,M1
 
posted by Miklos Hollender
 on March  5, 2009 #
 
Ken Livingston on RFK (on BBC): The defining thing about politicians: they get a worldview in their late teens, early 20s, and they stick to it. They spend their life trying to churn reality to conform to their worldview. And heres a politician-part of that small minority-who actually looks at facts and is prepared to change.
 
Its true. If youre staring at a professor chalking out the graphs on a harvard blackboard that show that free trade is good for all parties involved in the long run, why wouldnt you believe it 30 years hence? And if you dont believe him, why would you change? Peoples worldviews calcify, and theories are just picked up after the fact to buttress opinions.
 
posted by Firas
 on March  5, 2009 #
 
Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back.
 
I would say this is true, but its incomplete - that  academic scribbler is very likely trying to come up with a way to serve the madmen in authority, by concocting ideas which tell the madmen in authority they are right, just, and benevolent
(Im not saying anything particularly original here - e.g. Chomsky makes this point all the time).
 
People tend to read the above statement that an idea is more powerful than vested interests, which is a very dubious assertion - vested interests are quite capable of creating an ecological environment where ideas which support them flourish and ideas which oppose them are marginalized.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on March  5, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: March  4, 2009
 
Title: A 24 Puzzle
 
Imagine youve kidnapped the President of the United States. You record her making a statement that, if published, will strengthen the international forces of evil. The military is about to blow up the building youre in, so you have to get the video out electronically, but theyre monitoring your communications and will be able to put enormous pressure on anyone who receives a copy from you.
 
Heres the question: in the few minutes you have before the building is reduced to rubble, where do you upload the video to maximize the chance that it will get published?
 
Alright, so your first inclination is to upload it to your servers, but thats easy  they just seize your servers.
 
So you upload it to YouTube and have Google copy it to all of their servers. But then they just call Google and have them delete it.
 
Obviously if you had it on the front page of a popular website, that would solve things, but the front pages of popular websites are pretty closely guarded.
 
You could try mailing it to WikiLeaks, but although WikiLeaks is pretty openminded, they may not actually want to strengthen the international forces of evil. The same goes for any other particular free speech activist you could name  dst, Cryptome, etc.
 
Your best bet is probably to have a smart guy on the outside who keeps uploading it various places from behind Tor as older copies get deleted. But how many people have smart guys on the outside?
 
You could try spamming it to a bunch of blogs, wikis, and other sites (or even by email or IM for that matter), but thatll take too long  you only have a couple of minutes and probably a flaky connection to boot. Theres no way you can hit very many servers.
 
You could publish it on a Tor hidden service, but then theyd probably just DOS the whole Tor network.
 
Freenet seems too small and unreliable. Other P2P systems dont even make copies except on request.
 
Usenet seems like it should be a promising option, but does anyone use Usenet anymore?
 
More promising options seem like emailing it to some kind of large mailing list. But which list has the most insane free speech activists? (cypherpunks? lkml?) And will it mail out all those copies before the Feds get it unplugged?
 
How else do you get stuff onto lots of peoples machines? Web, Usenet, email, IM, HTTP access logs, DNS caches.
 
Can you think of anything better?
 
The current winner is Andy Baio with:
 
Upload it to Sharebee (which then sends it out to Megaupload, Rapidshare and a bunch of other anonymous hosting sites) and post the link to 4chan.  Theyre big on evil over there.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March  4, 2009
 
Most mailing lists have a size limit for messages sent through them (including lkml), so most of them will be out. Youd probably end up having your attachment stripped, anyway.
 
The answer to where you send your message is quite simple. The big hint is in the phrase international forces of evil. You send it to sympathetic people overseas.
 
posted by Keith
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
Upload it to a botnet (or pay for the privilege) and allow them to distribute and spam it for an indefinite period of time.
 
posted by Eric Sinclair
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
Upload it to Sharebee (which then sends it out to Megaupload, Rapidshare and a bunch of other anonymous hosting sites) and post the link to 4chan.  Theyre big on evil over there.
 
posted by Andy Baio
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
You are thinking basically about an activist panic button for data, right? Too many cops smashing cameras.
 
Its very tough without a confederate. Once you get it into friendly hands, even for a few minutes, they can spread it from there. Those international forces of evil probably have a server or two down in the old volcano lair.
 
If you dont have confederates the game is very different. You are then trying to get a piece of data into the hands of many many people who are not previously expecting it, on the hopes that a few will read it and act. Thats pretty much the definition of spam, no?
 
posted by Aristus
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
You need something that spreads because people are reading it. Upload to your site, then post Coral Cache links to Reddit and friends. (Madame Presidents Last Minutes [VID]) Post it also to Feedburner and those kinds of sites  maybe the spambots will pick it up too.
 
posted by Aristus
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
Id send it to anyone on #thepiratebay.org irc. Theyre the most likely to get it out for everyone to see and the least likely to remove it if asked.
 
posted by Jesse
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
Rent time on a BotNet and send it out like spam.
 
posted by Anonymous
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
Twitter
 
posted by jd
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
Email to someone at CNN or Foxnews.  Theyll show it 150 times a day.
 
posted by bryanl
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
It seems to me that Usenet would be an important piece in a solution to this puzzle, as it would be very difficult for the people who would prefer that you not get your recording out to remove that recording once it propagates throughout the Usenet network.  However, while this would make your recording available to many people, it would not alert them to the recordings existence.
 
With Andy Baios suggestion, how would your data be publicized?  Why should we assume that the administrators of Megaupload, Rapidshare and a bunch of other anonymous hosting sites would resist pressure to remove your data from their sites any better than we assume that Google would?  Note: Im not familiar with these sites and am assuming that Andy meant that uploaders to the services are anonymous, not that the administrators of them are.  In this case, your anonymity would not, it seems, be advantageous.  Publication in a decentralized, replicated manner would be.
 
posted by Phil Mocek
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
Send it to Al Jazeeranot succeptible to govt subpoenas, and doesnt give a crap about the US, and capable of spreading it quickly.
 
posted by Brian
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
Assuming youre with the forces of evil, you probably have access to a botnet. You only need a short burst of several thousand machines to:
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on March  4, 2009 #
 
The Sharebee idea is great Many of those file upload sites are located outside the USA.
 
posted by Dan
 on March  5, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: February 21, 2009
 
Title: RSS Hits the Big Time
 
As chaunceyt pointed out, the new stimulus bills implementation instructions require that each government agency report the money it gives out in RSS:
 
For each of the near term reporting requirements (major communications, formula block grant allocations, weekly reports) agencies are required to provide a feed (preferred: Atom 1.0, acceptable: RSS) of the information so that content can be delivered via subscription.
 
The document is very clear that the items in the feed cant simply be unstructured text, but have to be reusable data, e.g.:
 
Formula Block Grant Allocation Reports: Agencies are asked to provide Formula Block Grant Allocation information as soon as it becomes available. Data elements for the formula block grant allocation feed should include:
 
And it goes on like this for several pages.
 
Pretty amazing to see a government so tech-savvy.
 
Obligatory plug: Want to see more like this? Sign up to keep in touch with the PCCC. Were trying to get better congresspeople elected thru Internet organizing and better tools.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 21, 2009
 
Excellent news. This should hopefully make citizen monitoring of government spending much easier: see http://yorksamerica.blogspot.com/2009/01/opening-up-compliance-checking.html
 
posted by Steve Holden
 on February 21, 2009 #
 
Im interested to know why Atom 1.0 is preferred to RSS - what reasons did you have for that choice?
 
posted by Stephen
 on February 21, 2009 #
 
Sounds like a good idea, but RSS is open form unstructured text.  The financial data disclosed wont be easily recorded into structured databases, analyzed, and shared.
 
Actually, XML-based standards like XBRL would have been better than RSS because data disclosed in XBRL could be much more easily assimilated into analytical reports.
 
posted by Steven Adler
 on February 21, 2009 #
 
I updated the post to make it clearer that the data is structured.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on February 22, 2009 #
 
Why did you choose to make the story about RSS when Atom is the preferred format?
 
posted by 
 on February 22, 2009 #
 
Aaron, a few minutes ago, I tried to subscribe to the PCCC list via submission of the form on the page to which you linked, but I received an error message that showed something about an incomplete form (I think I saw something about do you want to volunteer? flash) before being redirected to a Google Spreadsheets page which informed me that Something bad happened. Dont worry, though. The Spreadsheets Team has been notified and well get right on it.
 
posted by Phil Mocek
 on February 23, 2009 #
 
Update: The PCCC homepage has a slightly-abbreviated version of the form that can be reached by following the Stay in the loop with the PCCC link on the homepage.  The abbreviated version is missing the do you want to volunteer question, and answering that question is mandatory for form submission.
 
posted by Phil Mocek
 on February 23, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: February 16, 2009
 
Title: Non-Hierarchical Management
 
You want to get something done. But its too big to do it by yourself, so you bring in some friends to help out. In your dreams, all your friends just click, understand exactly what it is theyre all supposed to do, and do it quickly and effective. In reality, this almost never happens.
 
In order for any team to succeed, they need someone helping them all stay on track  someone who we will call a manager.
 
The word manager makes many people uncomfortable. It calls up the image of a bossman telling you what to do and forcing you to slave away at doing it. That is not effective management.
 
A better way to think of a manager is as a servant, like an editor or a personal assistant. Everyone wants to be effective; a managers job is to do everything they can to make that happen. The ideal manager is someone everyone would want to have.
 
Instead of the standard org chart with a CEO at the top and employees growing down like roots, turn the whole thing upside down. Employees are at the top  theyre the ones who actually get stuff done  and managers are underneath them, helping them to be more effective. (The CEO, who really does nothing, is of course at the bottom.)
 
Most guides on management are written for big bosses at big companies, not people starting something new who want their team to be as effective as possible. (Hi, startup founders!) So herewith, a guide to effective non-hierarchical management.
 
Management is not a typical job. People who manage programmers dont spend their day programming. Nor do they spend their day writing memos. In fact, from the outside, it may appear like they dont spend their day doing very much at all. Dont be fooled.
 
Management is a serious job. It is incredibly difficult and wildly consuming. As an employee, if you miss a day off work, its no big deal: some work doesnt get done and you (or someone else) has to catch up on it later. As a manager, it can become a serious problem  if youre not working, then the dozen people you serve arent working effectively as well. It makes knocking off work to go to the fair a stressful proposition.
 
On the other hand, it can be incredibly rewarding. If you do your job right, you turn a group of individuals into a team, a group thats more effective than the sum of its parts. Together, you and your team can achieve amazing things. As a manager, your task is to serve the team  to make it as effective as it can possibly be, even if that means stepping on the toes of a few individuals.
 
One incredibly popular misconception is that managers are just there to provide leadership  you set everyone up, get them pointed in the right direction, and then let them go while you go back to the real stuff, whether its building things yourself, meeting with funders, or going on the road and talking up your organization. Those are all perfectly valid jobs, but they are not management. You have to pick one. You cannot do both.
 
As the manager, its your job to make sure things get done. This means you need a system for making sure things get done. This doesnt have to be anything fancy or complicated  a simple todo list will do  but simply trying to remember or writing yourself a note is not a system.
 
One of the nice things about having a system is it actually makes you less stressed out. Most people just keep their todo list somewhere in the back of their head. As things pile up, they become harder and harder to keep track of, and you become more stressed out about getting them all done or forgetting about them.
 
Simply writing them down on a list makes everything seem more manageable. You can see the things you have to do  really, theres not quite as many important ones as you thought  and you can put them in order and get that nice burst of satisfaction that comes from crossing them off.
 
Yes, it all sounds like silly, basic stuff, but its important. Just having a list with all the stuff you need to do  and taking it seriously, actually going down it and checking stuff off every single day  is the difference between being a black hole of action items and being someone who actually Gets Stuff Done.
 
As a servant, its crucial you know your masters well. You need to know what theyre good at and what gives them trouble. You need to be able to tell when theyre feeling good and when theyre in a rut. And you need to have a safe enough relationship with them that they can be honest with you and come to you when theyre in trouble. This is not easy. (You have to be willing to hear bad news about yourself.)
 
The most important piece is understanding what people are good at and what they like doing. A good first step is to just ask them, but often people are wrong or dont know. So you try giving them different things, seeing how they do at them, and adjusting accordingly.
 
But in addition to your teams professional skills, its important to understand their personal goals. However much you may care about the work, at bottom its still a job. You need to understand why your team members took it. Was it because it seemed interesting? Because it seemed worthwhile? Because it would give them valuable experience and help them get a better job down the road? Its important that you know, so you can make sure your tasks and expectations are in line with their goals.
 
You want the best working for you. People who arent just good at their job, but people who are also good at your job. People you can trust to not just do something right but tell you that the way you suggested doing it was wrong. People you can rely on to get things done if you just stay out of their way. At least, thats the ideal. In practice, its hard to find people like that and even when you do, they still need help.
 
I have never found the traditional methods of hiring  resums, interviews, quizzes  to be helpful at all. Instead, I look at two things: what someone has done and whether I enjoy spending time with them. The first shows not just their talent but also their ability to execute. If they havent made something interesting, whether as a side project or at a previous job, then theyre probably not worth hiring. Its not that hard to sit down and accomplish something; be wary of people who havent.
 
Similarly, you need to keep in mind that youre not just hiring a robot  youre hiring a flesh-and-blood human who youre going to need to spend a lot of time with during the day. That means they need to be someone you not just get along with, but enjoy being around. A formal interview, with all its stress and structure and contrivance, is a pretty bad environment for seeing if you like someone. Instead, just go get coffee and chat.
 
Everyone wants to work with their friends. After all, you have so much fun hanging out after work, why not hang out during work too? So they recruit their friends to work with them. (Or, even worse, they recruit their lovers.) But being friends is very different from being colleagues. All friends learn ways to adjust themselves to each other  which tones to use, which subjects to avoid, when to give each other space.
 
These go out the window when youre working together. You cant just not say things because theyll get your friend upset. So you say them, and they get upset, and you realize you have no way of dealing with each other when youre like this. It makes working together difficult, to say the least.
 
The situation is the same, but vastly worse, with couples. Plus, youre really screwed when your relationship falls apart under the stress.
 
If you do decide to work with people youre close with, you need to find a way to put your other relationship on hold while you work together. Which means you both need to be strong enough to be able to blow up at each other at work and then go out for drinks like nothing ever happened. If you cant do this (and few can), then either give up on the relationship or give up on the job.
 
The most extreme form of this, of course, is that you need to be able to fire your friend. Just because you like them doesnt mean theyll automatically be a good employee. And, sadly, theres really no way for you to know in advance. Bad employees are no less disastrous because theyre your friends. Which means that if you hire a friend, you need to be able to fire them.
 
Conversely, dont become close friends with the people you work with. You have to set some personal boundaries: youre their manager, not their friend. Naturally, part of being a manager means that you have to talk to people about their personal problems and possibly even offer advice. After all, its your job to make your team effective and if personal problems are distracting from that, you are going to have to face someones personal problems.
 
But be sure to keep these problems at arms length. Actually getting involved in someones personal life or otherwise establishing a close personal relationship them is asking for trouble.
 
Your first job as a manager is to make sure everyones on the same page. The team needs to understand what theyre expected to do, why theyre doing it, and who else is involved (funding it, using it, counting on it). If you picked a good team (point 2a), theyll hear this and find holes in your plan and catch things you hadnt thought of. (Which is good! Together, you can fix it.)
 
But real work cant begin until everyones on board with the plan.
 
Youre not managing a bunch of individual employees; youre managing a team. Youre all trying to accomplish the same goal. Its the managers job to make sure everyones comfortable with each other. (Hint: Those dumb break-the-ice games do not make people more comfortable.) And while theres obviously a lot of feedback you need to give people one-on-one (never chew people out in front of a group), you should try to do a lot in front of the team as well.
 
Its easy to fall into a trap where youre just giving feedback individually. The result is that everyone feels isolated, not knowing where their work fits in to the bigger picture. Providing opportunities for everyone to see what everyone else is up to is crucial to making your team actually feel like its a community, instead of just a group of your friends. (First law of friendship drift: Just because you like two people doesnt mean theyll automatically like each other.)
 
Its also a good opportunity to set a tone. You want people to treat each other like friends and colleagues, not backstabbing assholes or bickering siblings. As my friend Clay comments:
 
I have a no asshole rule which is really simple: I really dont want to work with assholes. So if youre an asshole and you work on my team, Im going to fire you. Now, if the whole team says gosh, thats awful. We want to work with as many assholes as we can! then we have a simple solution. Ill fire me! (FYI: The No Asshole Rule is a book. I thought it was actually a pretty good book as far as Business books go. As far as Im concerned, anybody could stand to read 100 pages giving them the MBA Book cover they need to say to their boss: lets get the assholes out of here.)
 
But a community is about more than just tone, theres process as well. You need to figure out how your team members work and how you can get them to work together. Some people like constant human feedback; others like locking themselves in a room for a couple hours and just getting something done. Everyone has their own habits and styles. Your job is to find an appropriate mix that makes everyone as productive they can be.
 
First, break the plan up into parts. Make sure everybody understands the parts.
 
Second, find a team member who wants to do each part. The key word here is wants  some things just have to get done, its true, but things will get done much better by people who want to do them.
 
One of the weird facts of life is that for just about everything you hate doing, there is someone out there who loves doing it. (There are even people who get a real kick out of cleaning toilets.) You may not currently employ them and you may not be able to hire them, but the is the goal worth striving toward.
 
Its also important to realize that a lot of what makes a task attractive or unattractive is outside the task itself. Managing the companys accounting books at first seems like a pretty uninteresting job. But when you realize it makes you indispensable and gives you authority over how all the money is spent, it suddenly seems a little more exciting. Use your knowledge from point 2 to structure tasks in a way thats attractive to your team members.
 
Another thing to keep in mind is that most people like variety in their work. Its very tempting to think of someone as the finance guy and just give them all the finance-related tasks. But in any organization theres lots of different kinds of things to do and a wide mix of people to do it. Many people will appreciate the opportunity to switch up the kinds of things they do.
 
Its tempting to think that this is inefficient, that by having one guy do all the finance tasks theyll become an expert in it and the finance tasks will get done more effectively. And theres definitely some truth in it. But one of the best ways to be inefficient is to make your team unhappy. If doing something new makes someone enjoy their job more, itll be well worth the cost in time of them having to learn how to do it.
 
Even better, their fresh perspective might just help you make improvements youd never thought of before.
 
As the manager, its a continual temptation to keep important jobs for yourself. After all, theyre usually fun to do and doggone-it theyre important, you cant risk them on somebody else! Resist the temptation.
 
For one thing, taking jobs for yourself is one way of distracting yourself from having to do actual management (point 1). But more importantly, youll never be able to develop your team if you keep all the real responsibility for yourself. Sure, Jony may not be as good at meeting funders as you, but a lot of thats because shes never gotten a chance to practice. If its something she wants to do (point 2), take her along and give him a chance to learn.
 
This is the bulk of what non-hierarchical management is about. Youve got good people, theyve got good responsibilities. Now its your job to do everything in your power to help them get them done.
 
A good way to start is just by asking people what they need. Is their office too noisy? Did they get confused about something you said? Are they stuck on a particular problem? Are they overwhelmed with work? Its your job to help them out: get them a quieter office, clarify things, find them advice or answers, shift some stuff off their plate. They shouldnt be wasting time with things that annoy them; thats your job.
 
But you have to be proactive as well. People tend to suffer quietly, both because they dont want to come whining to you and just because when youre stuck in a rut all your attention is focused on the rut. A key part of being a manager is checking in with people, pointing out that theyre stuck in a rut, and gently helping them out.
 
At any given time, theres lots of stuff that needs to be done. Part of your job is helping people decide what to tackle first. You dont want to be too didactic about it  people like choice and variety, theyre not always so happy when you just give them one instruction after another  but even thats usually far preferable to being overwhelmed with stuff.
 
The best prioritization relationship is a dialogue: OK, whats next? someone asks. Well, what about building the new sprocket management engine? Ugh, Im too tired for that today. OK, how about cleaning the frobnitz? Bo-ring. Oh, I know! We need someone to document the doohickey. Ooh, perfect  thanks!
 
Procrastination is the crop blight of the office-work world. It affects just about everyone and its very hard to fight alone. The single best way to stop procrastination is to sit down with someone and come up with the next concrete step they have to take and then start doing it together. Theres something magical about having another person sit down with you and do something that can overcome procrastinations natural resistance. And once you get someone started, momentum can often carry them through the rest of the day.
 
Even if all you do is help people overcome procrastination, you will be well worth it.
 
White-collar work is lonely. You sit at a desk, staring at a screen, poking at buttons. Its easy to get lost and off-track and depressed. Thats why its important to check in and see how things are doing. Not only does it give you a chance to see how people are doing (point 5), it gives you a chance to see how things are coming and gently steer them back on course if theyve drifted from what youve intended.
 
Remember, your job isnt to tell people how to do things; its to help them get it done. Sometimes this means helping them figure out how to do it, but in general you should assume that you work with smart people and theyll be able to handle it themselves. Again, be a servant, not a boss.
 
Studies consistently show that people are much happier and more productive when they have control over the way they work. Never take that away.
 
As manager, people will often come to you to make decisions or resolve disputes. Its very tempting, with people looking up at you for guidance, to want to give your sage advice. But the fact is, even if (or especially if) as a manager youre held up on a pedestal, you probably know less about the question than anyone else on the team.
 
The worst managers dont just make decisions when people come to them, they parachute in and start dictating tiny details. The urge to do this can be overwhelming, but there are few things more disastrous to morale. If you really have to give input, couch it as such. And if people fight back, know when to step back and say look, youre the expert. I was just giving my two cents. (Hint: Its right after they start fighting back.)
 
The best managers use these opportunities not to dictate an answer, but to have a Socratic dialogue to help figure out what the best answer is. Often when people are stuck on something, they really just need someone else to talk things over with, either for assistance or validation. Heres your chance to help.
 
Firing people is hard. Its probably the hardest thing youll ever do. People go to absurd lengths to try and make it easier (well just try him out for a month and see how it goes is a common one) but they never really help. You just have to bite the bullet and let people go. Its your job. If you cant do it, find someone else.
 
Firing people isnt just about saving money, or petty things like that. Its the difference between a great organization and a failure. Inefective people drag everyone else down to their level. They make it so that you cant take pride in what youre doing, so that you dread going into work in the morning, so that you cant rely on the other pieces of the project getting done. And assholes, no matter how talented they may be, are even worse. Conversely, there are few things more fun than working hard with a really nice, talented group of people.
 
You are never going to be able to tell whether someone is going to work out in advance. Assholes are sometimes easy to spot, but people can have great resumes, solid references, a charming interview style, and still be total failures. And the worst part is, there will always be excuses for their failures. I know, I know, theyll say, its just that Ive been really sick this week. Ive been distracted with family things. Ive been traveling. Look, Im sorry. I promise Ill do better this week. Ive said them all myself.
 
If youre not getting things done, you can always come up with excuses for why. Competent people get things done anyway. Ineffective ones let the excuses pile up. Theyre not going to leave themselves. You have to pull the trigger.
 
As the teams manager, there will be many opportunities where people will want to give you credit. And getting credit is nice, it makes you feel good. So you start coming up with excuses for why you deserve it, even though you didnt do any of the work. Well, it was my vision, you will say. I was the one who made it all happen.
 
But think of all those talented people slaving away at desks. They were the ones who actually made it happen. Make sure they get the credit. And not in a facetious, thanks to all the little people way. No, you need to own up. You are the assistant. They did all the work. As Clay says, A managers worst enemy is his or her own ego.
 
Spending your days doing grunt work for people who are smarter than you. Obsessing over their mood and personal problems. Turning down all opportunities to take credit or get attention so you can continue to work as a servant. Does this really sound like a job you want?
 
Probably not. Few people are cut out for it. Its really hard. Its incredibly stressful. Its not at all glamorous.
 
But its vitally important. A team without a manager is doomed to be an ineffective team. So if you cant do it, find somebody else.
 
Thanks to Clay Johnson and Emmett Shear for their comments on drafts of this essay.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 16, 2009
 
First Post!
 
A thoughtful essay, well stated.
 
I generally agree, and its interesting to think of the traditional org chart model as upside down.
 
I much prefer a living tree model, with the CEO is as trunk, the coders/engineers the leaves, and the middle management branches.  A leaf or branch can die off but youre screwed if the trunk fails.
 
Now one can really get academic and cue horrible analogies about grafting as M&A, pesticides as closed source and organic farming as open source, but Ill refrain.
 
posted by Dan Steingart
 on February 16, 2009 #
 
I think hiring friends or lovers is risky, but not always a bad idea. If you have a genuinely open relationship and youre both emotionally stable, it can work well. But, and its a big but, if theres any issues in your relationship they will surely come out in the stress of a working environment.
 
I think its temptingly easy to say dont work with lovers, but in many ways, I think working together is a great test of the strength of your relationship. If you can work together and you know and respect each other well enough to make that work, you have a wonderful relationship.
 
posted by Callum
 on February 16, 2009 #
 
While this is not a bad essay, you can tell its derivative from other essays and popular wisdom. For example:
 
So if youre an asshole and you work on my team, Im going to fire you
 
The real world is not like that. Maybe net start-ups run by VC-types can afford to think theyre like that. But theres a lot of litigation that testifies to the entrenchedness of assholes. And Im talking major-level abusive here, not poor social skills.
 
Youre channelling, well, the sort of people who write stuff like the above. And again, its not that its wrong. Its not even that it shouldnt be written. Its just  fundamentally a sermon which doesnt go very far.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on February 17, 2009 #
 
While the military falls down on a lot of things, leadership is their forte. Since starting at Tulane med school four years ago (how times flies!), I have found the leadership skills of some of fairly senior executives lacking compared to the average Navy lieutenant or Marine captain. I say that having been on staff at the Naval Academy and a student rep on the curriculum committee at Tulane  Ive seen military and civilian counterparts dealing with essentially identical problems but having entirely different conversations.
 
I have to say, I think you did an excellent job. If youre interested in further reading, theres a book, oh, Im afraid Im getting the name wrong, (most of my books are packed right now) but I think its the Junior Officers Guide or the Field Officers Handbook, some thing like that. Written by an officer who survived WWII. Very similar advice.
 
I couple of other gems to keep in your back pocket:
 
for your troops: Teddy Roosevelts The Man in the Arena:
 
for you: John Paul Jones Qualifications of a Naval Officer and Captain Hopwoods The Laws of the Navy
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on February 17, 2009 #
 
You might like the phrase take the cash and let the credit go?
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on February 17, 2009 #
 
Im finding myself agreeing with Seth Fs comment - the essay above is a decent summary of some commonsense, uncontroversial goals, but falls short in the way of actual experience with how those goals might be accomplished when dealing with real people. Break a task into parts, sure, but which parts? Dont hire assholes, okay, but what if youre facing a choice between talent, an abrasive personality, and a deadline? Have you bumped into your line between micromanagement and parting out work? Between being a servant to your team and firing ineffective assholes?
 
Publications like the HBR devote whole sections of every issue to fictional accounts of workplace disagreements over priorities, credit, and goals, with a rotating panel of guest writers disagreeing over the right way to handle a situation. The devil is always always always in the details, and the world is stocked with talented, experienced people who wouldnt disagree with a word of the above and yet still struggle with the basic, irreducible business of building consensus and motivating people.
 
posted by Michal Migurski
 on February 17, 2009 #
 
My 2 cents.  This article is too cliche. Firing ineffective people is not a reality in California.  Courts take a dim view on firing without cause.  Let me know how your Judge, he was a not-fun, ineffective asshole! stand goes over.  We all enjoy working for teams that are motivated, fun and driven to success.
 
A good manager works with the cards he or she is given to still be successful.  Update this article for business reality.
 
Food for thought - as our government leans more to the socialistic side (Big Gov), will we begin seeing labor laws stretch further right?  I see it becoming harder in the US to fire ineffective people as courts start to reflect the societies weariness of mass layoffs.
 
posted by Mason Wenker
 on February 17, 2009 #
 
Really good stuff!
 
Three points:
 
A person I learned a lot from said that a good supervisor does two hard things:
 
Makes sure everybody on the team wants to do the right thing.
 
Lets us do whatever we want.
 
Obviously, if you do just 2, you have chaos.  If you do just 1, you have a mind-numbing autocracy.  But with both,  everybody wins.
 
A tiny little book by Robert Greenleaf called The Servant as Leader has a great explanation of all this.
 
Finally, about firing people.  You can indeed sack people who cant or wont do the job.   And, you have to.  I work in a small company where we had a slacker on staff.  Everybody was grumbling that he was spending all his time websurfing and goofing around.  We finally sacked him, and the team was honestly grateful.
 
If you work in a big company with lots of procedures, just follow them. Get help from your HR krewe  they know what to do.   If you work in a small company, write the person a letter saying this: Youre not doing the job. Here are specifics.  You have two weeks to rectify the situation or youre out.  Then, at the end of the two weeks, tell them it didnt work out.  If it did work out, great!  But it probably wont.
 
Your lawyer may tell you not to fire anybody.  You should tell them, Look here, lawyer, I have a business need to get rid of this person. Please tell me how to get it done.  Please dont just tell me what I cant do.
 
posted by Ollie Jones
 on February 17, 2009 #
 
goodie! this is quiet a very interesting read. Ive been reading management books for sometime now and cant hardly finish them but upon reading this post I say Awesome! =)
 
PS. I think this is a typo
 
Sure, Jony may not be as good at meeting funders as you, but a lot of thats because shes never gotten a chance to practice. If its something she wants to do (point 2), take her along and give him a chance to learn.
 
posted by lexx12
 on February 18, 2009 #
 
extremely idealists article on verge of quixotichave any of your readers have seen such a team/manager ? ..of all the companies i have worked in..i found all managers who will take your work annonymize it and show it as theirs..who are shallowhate good programmers because they dont give in to ass licking and promote sycophants..and dont give a damn about technologyand i have seen lot of companies including two companies voted to be top 20 work places.. instead of spending time in conjuring up things which will never happen a guide for naive idealistic newbie to survie the real world of IT managers from hell would have been better..articles just like this give false hope to people that such good managers can exist
 
posted by manu
 on February 19, 2009 #
 
Aaron, nice set of quick tips on first line supervision. You may be interested in the work of Jon Husband on http://wirearchy.org (http://blog.wirearchy.com/what-is-wirearchy/)
 
Jargonwise, supervisors have direct reports, supervisors report to managers.
 
So, when are you going back for a masters in management science? Or picking up a subscription to the Harvard Business Review?
 
posted by Phil Wolff
 on February 22, 2009 #
 
Excellent post! Lots of good points and reminders in here. Managing is truly a challenge, but one I enjoy doing and strive to become better at.
 
Im headed off to share this via twitter. Thanks!
 
posted by Blake Nyquist
 on February 23, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: February 13, 2009
 
Title: NYT Personals
 
Michael Francis McElroy for The New York Times
 
Attention attractive people: Are you looking for someone respectable enough that theyve been personally vetted by the New York Times, but has enough of a bad-boy streak that the vetting was because they liberated millions of dollars of government documents? If so, look no further than page A14 of todays New York Times:
 
Aaron Swartz, a 22-year-old Stanford dropout and entrepreneur who read Mr. Malamuds appeal, managed to download an estimated 20 percent of the entire database: 19,856,160 pages of text.
 
Then on Sept. 29, all of the free servers stopped serving. The government, it turns out, was not pleased.
 
A notice went out from the Government Printing Office that the free Pacer pilot program was suspended, pending an evaluation. A couple of weeks later, a Government Printing Office official, Richard G. Davis, told librarians that the security of the Pacer service was compromised. The F.B.I. is conducting an investigation.
 
Continuing on the blog:
 
In the technology world, Mr. Swartz is kind of a big deal, as the saying goes. At the age of 14, he had a hand in writing RSS, the now-ubiquitous software used to syndicate everything from blog posts to news headlines directly to subscribers.
 
[O]ver the course of six weeks, Mr. Swartz was able to download 780 gigabytes of data  19,856,160 pages of text  from Pacer. The caper grabbed an estimated 20 percent of the entire PACER network, with a focus on the most recent cases from almost every circuit.
 
When the government abruptly shut down the free public program, Mr. Malamud saw it as a sign of possible trouble ahead. Who shuts down a 17-site national program with no notice whatsoever? he recalled thinking. I immediately saw the potential for overreaction by the courts.
 
Mr. Malamud told Mr. Swartz: You need to talk to a lawyer. I need to talk to a lawyer. Mr. Swartz recalled, I had this vision of the Feds crashing down the door, taking everything away.
 
He said he locked the deadbolt on his door, lay down on the bed for a while, and then called [to warn] his mother.
 
But when lawyers told Mr. Malamud and Mr. Swartz that they appeared to have broken no laws, Mr. Malamud sent Mr. Swartz a message saying, You should just lay low for a while.
 
Mr. Swartz said that he waited for a couple of months, but nobody came knocking on my door. I started breathing a little more easily.
 
Want to meet the man behind the headlines? Want to have the F.B.I. open up a file on you as well? Interested in some kind of bizarre celebrity product endorsement? Im available in Boston and New York all this month  contact me by email, Facebook, and web form.
 
More:
 
UPDATE: Schwartz expands on his story in Steal These Federal RecordsOkay, Not Literally.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 13, 2009
 
Is that a picture of you?  If so, your lamps are asymetric and you need to rotate the right one by about 45 degrees.
 
posted by Ed Singleton
 on February 13, 2009 #
 
Great job.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on February 13, 2009 #
 
hahahahah, thats awesome.  congrats!
 
I had to deal with the pacer system working on a documentary, and its obscene how bizarre it is.
 
posted by Jim Gilliam
 on February 13, 2009 #
 
So whats the deal here? Did the gov just over react, or is there something more cynical going on?
 
posted by N
 on February 14, 2009 #
 
more liberate, less self-congratulate.
 
posted by nsh
 on February 16, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: February  4, 2009
 
Title: How Depressions Work
 
On Capitol Hill sit many powerful people  Congressmen, Senators, Justices  but also numerous others who do the daily work of keeping government running. And, like anyone with such a weighty responsibility, they sometimes want a break: a chance to see a movie or eat out with their spouse.
 
Kids always make these things difficult, so in the late 1950s someone thought of starting a Capitol Hill Babysitting Coop. The idea was simple: a bunch of families would get together and dole out scrip  little fake money  amongst themselves. Anytime you wanted to go out, you could just hire another family in the coop to watch your kids: one piece of scrip per hour. Later, of course, youd earn the money back by watching someone elses kids.
 
It was a brilliant system and much beloved, until sometime in the 1970s. See, when people left the babysitting coop, they got to keep the balance of their scrip. And so, over the years, the amount of scrip in circulation fell. Soon scrip was in short supply and people begun hoarding theirs for fear of losing it forever. There were few opportunities to babysit (and thus earn scrip) so people didnt want to lose the scrip they had by paying it to a sitter. Which, of course, meant even fewer babysitting opportunities, making more people want to hoard their scrip, and on and on in a downward spiral.
 
Since the coop consisted largely of lawmakers and lawyers, they attempted a legislative solution to the crisis, requiring everyone go out at least once every six months. The proposal just made things worse. Eventually, someone tried the idea of handing out more scrip to everyone, and soon, the coops delicate balance was restored.
 

 
In the 2000s, house prices started rising and everyone started sinking their money into them. Average people would buy houses and mortgage them, banks would buy mortgages, investors would buy mortgage derivatives from banks, and so on. Pundits published books with titles like Why the Real Estate Boom Will Not Bust and many people just assumed housing prices would go up forever. At the peak of it, we had roughly $80 trillion in global financial assets.
 
Of course, it was clear to anyone who looked closely that this couldnt go on forever  and that when it stopped, it would bring a lot down with it. And, sure enough, today housing prices are almost back to their usual level and we now have only $60 trillion.
 
Just like people taking scrip out of the babysitting coop, an enormous amount of money has been taken out of the economy. So naturally people want to hold on to whats left. So they dont spend their money, which means theres less employment opportunities, which means more people want to hold on to their money, and on and on in a downward spiral.
 
Normally when this happens, as in a recession, the government has an easy solution: lower interest rates. What happens is the countrys leading bankers meet at the Federal Reserve and vote to lower interest rates. Lets say they decide to lower them (as theyve done a lot lately). Then the Federal Reserve Bank in New York starts buying up Treasury Bills (government IOUs) for cash, injecting money into the economy. This allows banks to lend out more money, lowering the interest rate at which money is lent out, and thus encouraging people to start spending again. (Later, when the economy is doing well, theyll raise the rates again, pulling money out and making sure things dont get out of hand.)
 
But this isnt simply a recession. The Feds lowered the interest rate to zero  zero! theyre giving money away  and unemployment just keeps rising. Losing a quarter of global financial assets hurts. But now the Fed has a problem: it cant lower the interest rate anymore. Interest rates dont go any lower than zero.
 
Which means, as J. M. Keynes foresaw back during the first Great Depression, we need another way of getting money into the economy. This isnt rocket science  Keynes suggested stuffing bills into bottles and burying them down mineshafts; Milton Friedman once proposed tossing cash out of helicopters. But as long as the government is spending money, we might as well spend it on something useful. And thus, fiscal stimulus.
 
We spend the money to build roads and trains and high-speed Internet connections. We give away health care and hand out welfare checks and mail people tax rebates. We do whatever it takes to get more money into the economy. Which people then turn around and spend on all the things they normally start spending money on and the engine of capitalism once again start to turn.
 
Keynes genius came in seeing that the Depression wasnt a moral problem. Were not being punished for our exuberance or our stinginess, just as the folks on Capitol Hill werent at fault for not wanting to go out. In both cases, the problem wasnt legislative, but merely technical: there just wasnt enough money to go around. And the technical problem has a technical solution: print more money.
 
The moralists insist its irresponsible for us to just print more money. After all, they say, debt got us into this mess; is more debt really going to get us out? This is what they told FDR, causing him to hit the break on a recovery that was pulling us out of the Great Depression. This is what they told Japan, ending their recovery and plunging the country into a lost decade of unemployment.
 
Its not irresponsible to spend money; its irresponsible not to. Factories are lying idle, people are sitting at home unemployed, and our economy is slowing. We can spend money to make use of it all, or we can just continue downward spiral. The choice is ours.
 
Further reading:
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February  4, 2009
 
We dont have to act through the Federal government to print money.  Theres always the option of local currencies.  Joe, I dont want to lay people off, so Im going to give you the option of taking 25% of your salary in coupons that are good here and at some other local businesses.
 
posted by Don Marti
 on February  4, 2009 #
 
Brilliant.
 
Of course the scrip isnt fake money  its different money.  Instead of commodity money (usually exchangable for some precious metal), or fiat money, its service money  each unit of scrip is pegged to a value of one hour, and the members of the co-op were required (subject to availability, of course) to accept scrip as payment for services rendered.
 
The fact that the members of the co-op agree to require each other to redeem scrip for babysitting services make it, in some ways, more real than the fiat money issued by the U.S.
 
Now there is no redemption point of last resort  if all the other members of the co-op decide they are no longer interested in babysitting, the one participant still interested would be left holding a bunch of currency with no one willing to take it as payment for services.  With commodity money, there can be a stock of some non-perishable good that can back the money, but a stream of services is, by definition, highly perishible.  So the co-op scrip currency only works to the extent that there is a workforce behind it willing to accept it as payment for services rendered.  But theres nothing fake about scrip.
 
Daniel Lawson
 
posted by Daniel Lawson
 on February  4, 2009 #
 
If printing money created wealth, Zimbabwe would be the wealthiest nation on earth
 
To say the current depression is about a drop in the supply of script/dollars puts the cart before the horse.
 
It was the oversupply (the excessive leverage) caused by fractional reserve banking and central banks with inflationary and low interest rate monetary policies which led to an enormous amount of malinvestment which we must now pay for.
 
Printing money wont and cant make the economy better. Printing money doesnt create wealth, it only transfers wealth from the people holding currency to the people that get the new currency first (the banks).
 
posted by Steve Dekorte
 on February  4, 2009 #
 
Yes, brilliant
 
print more money: That is expending MY money without my consent, in government spending (it tends to spend it worse than me). If you print one more billion dollar you are stealing the current dollars holders 1 Billion of wealth value. Hey, no problem, most of them are chinese and japanese!!
 
Sorry man, but thats fckng stupid, I could admit that getting a little in debt when you are not could be wealthy(keynes theory, all extremes are bad), but getting MORE in debt when today America is one of the most in debt countries of the world is stupid. You dont face the problems only delay and make them bigger in the future.
 
America is going down because you cant spend for living four times per capita more of everything that the rest of the world forever.
 
You have been living at Japan expense first, now Chinese. They support the dollar because they need the export and artificially lowers their currency. Without them inflation in America would be enormous.
 
I had nothing against America, on the contrary, but recall what I said you today:
You are used to live over your means,and you will learn it the hard way.
 
posted by Jose
 on February  4, 2009 #
 
Whats wrong with just letting the downward spiral continue until some level of equilibrium is achieved at lower levels of economic activity? What was great about the way things were before?
 
Youre sounding like President Bush (whom I voted for, before I realized he was fronting a cabal of whacky world domination neocons) after 9/11, when he said the way out was to spend.
 
But buying stuff when its not really needed is insane.
 
posted by Chris Ryland
 on February  5, 2009 #
 
Somewhere in there, you are talking about velocity of money.
 
It is not a fact that the velocity of money will go up with increased money supply, it is a guess.
 
Heres an analogy for you.
 
You walk into a tshirt store with 10 dollars, and all the shirts cost 100 dollars, and none of them are your size.
 
You dont want to buy any shirts, and even if you did, you dont have enough money.
 
Someone walks in and gives you a 100 dollars.  Are you gonna buy any tshirt in that store?
 
If the aggregate economy has no demand for a large portion of goods and services available, giving people more money isnt going to get them to buy things they dont want anymore.
 
posted by Ziad Hussain
 on February  5, 2009 #
 
What on earth makes you think that we need to continue printing more money? Printing more money means we need more people to work for that money, to keep the cogs turning.
 
This implies that we will have room for growth.
 
We DO NOT have any more room for growth.
 
Were hitting the ceiling as far as ACTUAL, PHYSICAL resources go. This should be common sense.
 
Our planet is overpopulated, and things are getting cramped everywhere. Especially in the third world, whose unchecked growth we encourage for such profits.
 
Money is an abstract symbol. Of course more of it can be made.
 
But what about room for the human population to grow? Room to cut down more wilderness to keep industry rolling? Were already running out.
 
Technology shouldve solved this problem with genetic engineering of crops, but it hasnt worked because the population inevitably grew too large for that.
 
Thats what youre asking. We need a better, long-term solution, and we can only start by running the current one into the ground before we can build a new one that works.
 
posted by Carl Erikson
 on February  5, 2009 #
 
You cannot Spend your way to Prosperity.
 
You cannot dig and fill ditches as economic regeneration because all activity involves NET Energy input. You cant afford that when you are bankrupt.  See ?
 
posted by av
 on February  5, 2009 #
 
Interest rates dont go any lower than zero.
 
Im trying to find an economist who can explain why. Institutions buy U.S. treasuries mainly for security, not for income.
 
And some of the experiments with stamp script or other money that automatically loses value over time  creating an incentive to keep the money circulating instead of hoarding it  seem to have been successful.
 
posted by JohnJames
 on February  5, 2009 #
 
Interest rates dont go any lower than zero.
 
Im trying to find an economist who can explain why. Institutions buy U.S. treasuries mainly for security, not for income.
 
Treasury bills are the government borrowing money, not loaning it. The government doesnt loan money directly, it aids banks so they can loan money. But no bank would loan money at less than zero  theyd have to lose money on the deal! So if you loan money to banks at interest rates less than zero, they just keep the extra money and keep loaning out at near-zero.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on February  5, 2009 #
 
Aaron,
 
This scrip story is one of Krugmans well-known favourites, and the standard answer to it is always that its not a problem of the lack of liquidity, but a problem of price fixing.
 
Why does one hour have to worth 1 scrip? Why not let people ask and bid however many scrips they want for one hour?
 
In this case, fluctuating prices according to demand and supply take care of the problem. As this is not a moral question but something that simply has price, just let people offer a high price for it if they want it that badly and problem solved.
 
And this isnt a good enough example, because the price of houses and other goods in real life isnt fixed this way.
 
This crisis has more complicated reasons.
 
The core economic reason is insanely low Fed interest rates between 2002-2005. Look it up. If money is cheap, of course there is a big temptation to invest them into foolish investments and/or bid the price of houses up and/or get into debt, as debt is cheap.
 
There are also cultural causes, a general culture of present-orientedness as opposed to future-orientedness, a culture of immediate gratification, immediate satisfaction.
 
This again has many causes which goes a bit beyond the limits of one comment.
 
posted by Miklos Hollender
 on February  5, 2009 #
 
Miklos: Keynes addresses this in detail. If theres too little money in circulation, then the solution would be to bid down the price. But to bid down prices, you need to bid down wages. And if you bid down wages, people both have less money to spend and are even less likely to spend it, since they fear their wages will be even lower in the future. Which means even less money in circulation, and the downward spiral continues.
 
Sure, one can think of many causes of our situation; what Im discussing here is how to avoid a depression.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on February  6, 2009 #
 
When you print more money, you also devalue your currency, which leads to inflation since we import so much. The solution isnt to print more money, it is to produce more things that people want. America is responsible for more innovation in the last 100 years than any other country and for this reason it is (was?) the most prosperous nation in the world. Instead of financial innovation, we need product innovation and I believe we can get out the mess we find ourselves in
 
posted by Abbi Vakil
 on February  7, 2009 #
 
Amused by all the rants in the comments above!
 
This is a favourite example of mine, and as Miklos points out, one way to get the co-op working again is to let the price float. The other is to print money, but I dont like the explanation you give:
 
there just wasnt enough money to go around. And the technical problem has a technical solution: print more money.
 
The reason printing money works is, I think, that it changes the calculus of whether to go out tonight (spend) or next month (save), because next month you will need to use more coupons for the same service. So youre more likely to go out tonight, which give someone else employment, and so the ball is rolling again.
 
Maybe thats equivalent, because after a period of inflation, or after prices have fallen, there are more evenings worth of scrip in circulation
 
posted by improbable
 on February  7, 2009 #
 
the flip-side of hoarding because there is too little money in the system is hoarding because there is too much.
 
imagine that the co-op decides to give each person left an extra 1,000 scrips, just so nobody will run out. so some of the people stop babysitting others kids. why would they? they have enough scrips to last them for a good long while.
 
so it becomes harder and harder for people that go out to find people that will actually babysit their kids for the price of a scrip. they have to resort to spending 2 scrips, or 20, or even return to spending actual dollars again.
 
print enough scrips, throw money out of helicopters, at some point some important people decide that your money is no good here. and pretty soon people are carting wheelbarrows of cash around to buy loaves of bread (its happened before).
 
value of money can only remain consistent if the cash remains sufficiently scarce. diamonds are valuable because they are rare, and because they are finite.
 
take the finite-ness out of cash, and you take out its value.
 
[side note: who does that hurt the most? the poor (who dont have much to begin with), and the elderly (who dont have the opportunity to earn more wealth to keep up).]
 
posted by nic
 on February  9, 2009 #
 
@nic I had the exact same thought, down to making up the example with 1000 scrips for everyone ;-)
 
Is it so unconceivable that the economy might need readjusting/healing (which would be the original use for depressions, I think). Yes, in theory the people could still produce, but their products had been bought with borrowed money. Now the economy needs to readjust so that products get bought with real money.
 
Trying to think about another example: suppose you work as a street cleaner or something, and the bank has given you a good credit to buy your house. What could go wrong? They have your house as a safety, and they assume its price will only rise. Since you have so much credit, you decide to buy a TV set for every room of your 10 bedroom house. So the TV industry flourishes. They build factories to output millions of TVs every day. Then the crisis sets in, and suddenly they realize that all you could offer them in return for their TVs is your street cleaning services, as your house has become worthless. Sure, they still have the factories that can output millions of TVs every day. But they decide that they dont want to give you 10 TVs in return for a measley street cleaning job.
 
What is needed is somebody who produces something that the TV makers want, so that it is still worth for them to keep producing their TVs.
 
Maybe the economy can adjust as such, some car manufacturer steps up and decides to swap TVs for cars. Or maybe the economy cant even adjust as such so far - there might be more important things to buy than a TV for every room, so if you are one of the players who actually produces something worthwhile, you might still decide to not exchange your product for TVs.
 
So yes, the production capacity of the society might not have changed, but people might be producing the wrong things. The depression is needed to readjust the production to worthwhile things.
 
posted by Bjrn
 on February 10, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: February  3, 2009
 
Title: Belm
 
Can we begin? she asked, staring up at him with big pleading eyes. She was the most beautiful girl in the room, the kind of girl you catch yourself looking at involuntarily, because even looking is such a thrill. And this he had done, for some time, until her gay friend came over and told him My friend thinks youre beautiful.
 
She spoke barely a word of English and he hardly spoke more Portuguese, so her gay friend translated between them. She says you are very beautiful, the translator would say, and he, not knowing how to react, would ask her name. She says she wants to be your girlfriend, the translator would say, and, not knowing how much was embellished, he would ask what she did. And so it went for what seemed like an hour.
 
She says, Can we begin? the translator finally said.
 
Uhh, he replied.
 
In Brazil, he explained, it is traditional for the man to go first.
 
Ohh, he replied.
 
And then they made out.
 
Belm is like that.
 
It is a city that can only be described as laid back, a sprawl of falling buildings and faded billboards, a distinctively Latin American city, where men wander around with their shirts off and adults sit in chairs by the side of the road. No one is ever in a hurry.
 
Kids roam the streets, couples hand-in-hand, with no adults in sight. Two teens stand necking on the sidewalk. Something interesting is always going on.
 
The first night we walked a block and got swept into a student opera about the Amazon. We ducked out only to find a wrestling match staged by clowns in drag. A few blocks away, passing three outdoor bands, we found the waterfront, along which were a dozen shops and restaurants, and another couple bands.
 
When we couldnt find a table, a couple invited us to join theirs. When I couldnt speak Portuguese, they just gave the universal thumbs-up and grinned, then offered me a drink. They copied down the address of the bar they were heading to and tried to discuss Fergie of the Black-Eyed Peas.
 
Parks are everywhere. And bars are close behind. So we went hopping from one to another, drinking and talking long into the night.
 
The next morning the empty metal shells surrounding the park had been filled in to form a bustling marketplace. The streets were full of life and shirtless kids hauled carts on their shoulders.
 
The World Social Forum was already being dismantled by the time we got there, but it was still inspiring in its scope. 200,000 activists came to this city, each hoping for something bigger than themselves. They filled up all the planes in and out and took over both universities, and used it all to build a giant party.
 
Signs and arrows pointed every direction, each former classroom commandeered for a discussion on some new topic. Kids posed for tourist photos by the welcome sign featuring the Forums slogan: Another world is possible. Possible, but not present. Everywhere were tables selling books, food, trinkets, shirts. Vendors lined the sidewalks hawking bottled water and packaged candies. Litter lined the streets.
 
The rain falls in spurts. First a trickle, then a flood, then right back to a trickle. A rent-a-cop pats a girls head. The streets curve, and wind, and turn back into themselves. The water here is brown, like sludge. When I first saw it from the sky I mistook it for a strange kind of land. I made the same mistake again when I saw it on the map.
 
A bus goes from one university to the other. The seats quickly fill and kids pack into the aisle, three-deep. It ambles down a tiny narrow road, surrounded by ramshackle favela houses. Kids chase each other past the buildings. The bus passes through quickly.
 
The other university is packed and sprawling. A crowd stands with umbrellas in the mud, listening to a man chant slogans from a stage. The road continues down into the Amazon, past tent cities and soccer fields and gardens and exhibitions. Cars share the street peacefully with crowds of people. A boombox on the sidewalk; dancing in the streets. The path always lined with vendors and litter.
 
We dead-end in a forest. A man invites us all into his truck. Watch crowds part through the windshield. Passengers become friends and exchange email addresses.
 
Discussions of tactics and theory stretch long into the night, across rooms and cars and hotels and restaurants. And then there are the parties.
 
An airplane hanger, filled with kids, all dancing. Row upon row of them, covered in sweat and caked with mud, still carrying their bags, moving with abandon. They stretch for what seems like forever. And at the end is a huge stage, with dancing girls, a rocking band, and lights so powerful that when they rotate forward they illuminate the entire crowd. As the set ends, it feels like the whole building is about to explode.
 
The crowd spills out into the street, filling the surrounding blocks, as each person goes their separate way, back to the world that already exists.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February  3, 2009
 
So damn chill. Loved reading this.
 
posted by Nick Gray
 on February  4, 2009 #
 
Very well written and hard hitting . it shows true colors of such enterprises of pseudo welfare fueled by tax dollars and glorified by media. 
thanks for telling the truth .
 
posted by Prashant Singh
 on February  4, 2009 #
 
The city name is Belm, not Blem.
 
posted by Eduardo Rocha
 on February  5, 2009 #
 
Whoa. Thanks for capturing this. One comment I heard repeated was that the streets of the forum felt much like Woodstock. Some described this with criticism (especially those comparing it to the most recent european social forum), but many others embraced this quality with jubilation seeing it as representing a form of activism or a social movement on its own.
 
posted by Philip Ashlock
 on February  8, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January 28, 2009
 
Title: Economic BS Detector
 
People are trying to lie to you. Or maybe they just dont know what theyre talking about. Either way, you shouldnt listen to them. But how can you tell? Heres a guidebook of key phrases that indicate someone doesnt know what theyre talking about when they talk about the economy:
 
Creates/destroys jobs. You often hear men of business saying that their company created 2000 new jobs. And in some sense that may be true, but its probably less exciting if it turned out that they did it by destroying 2000 jobs somewhere else.
 
The same is true for economic policy in general; it will typically create jobs in one place, but only at the expense of losing them somewhere else. Thats because the number of jobs (i.e. the unemployment rate) isnt just a free-floating fact of life; its specifically controlled by the Federal Reserve.
 
The Federal Reserve is a cadre of bankers and economists that, among other things, meets regularly to decide interest rates. When there are too few jobs, they lower interest rates, making it easier for people to borrow money and start new companies, hiring new people and creating jobs. (The current crisis is the rare exception  interest rates are at zero and there still arent enough jobs. Thus the stimulus package.) When there are too many jobs, they raise interest rates, making it harder for businesses to start and expand, and cutting back on jobs.
 
Wait, too many jobs? The Federal Reserve worries that if unemployment gets too low, well hit a cycle of accelerating inflation where prices spiral up and up. Critics argue that they actually dont like low unemployment because then businesses have to compete for employees, which means they have to pay more and give out nicer benefits. So, critics argue, they try to leave some unemployment, so that employees are competing and  can be pushed into taking lower wages.
 
If you really care about how many jobs there are  and obviously you should  then you shouldnt worry about particular policies or people, whose effects either wont matter or will be counteracted by the Fed. You should worry about the Fed and who controls it.
 
Helps/hurts competitiveness. Lets face facts: America isnt competing with anyone. Remember competition? You sell a widget for $5; I come along and sell it for $4; then you have to either lower your price or lose all your customers to me and go bankrupt.
 
But America isnt going to go bankrupt. Countries dont really do that sort of thing.
 
Instead, what matters for how well a country is doing is (roughly speaking) its productivity, i.e. how much stuff it makes per person-hour of work. Sometimes you can increase this productivity by working with other countries  by, for example, trading some steel for some coffee. But this is just a way to up your own countrys productivity; it has nothing to do with competition.
 
The competitiveness bogeyman is often trotted out when someone is trying to get you to do something you dont want. Oh, sure, they say, you may not want to do it, but the Chinese are and theyre going to eat your lunch. It just isnt so. Nothing will stop us from chugging along, eating our lunch just fine; even if the Chinese are eating two lunches.
 
Sadly, a lot of economic commentators dont know what theyre talking about, so you see these phrases everywhere. Now that you know theyre bogus, it should save you a lot of time.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 28, 2009
 
As much as I agree with you that claims about creating/preserving jobs or competitiveness are often dubious, some of the stuff in your post is pretty shoddy economics.
 
The Federal Reserve is a cadre of wealthy bankers? As far as I can see, of the 15 rotating members of the Federal Open Market Committee, the body that actually makes decisions on interest rates, only 4 seem to have any background in banking. The majority is made up of academic economists and business professors. This isnt exactly the evil guys in top hats and monocles scenario you seem to be implying.
 
You also seem to be confused about the reason why the Fed tries to stabilize the economy around potential output (which in the US roughly corresponds to an unemployment rate of 5 percent). It is not because it wants to preempt any wage increases whatsoever. What it seeks to prevent is wages that rise so rapidly that inflation expectations become unanchored, a situation that would invariably lead to accelerating actual inflation. How high a rate of inflation is optimal is surely debatable (and in fact hotly debated amongst economists), but an ever-rising rate of inflation seems like a pretty bad idea to me.
 
posted by Tobias
 on January 28, 2009 #
 
To add to what Tobias said above: There was inflation in the late 1990s. It just wasnt consumer price inflation, it was asset price inflation in the form of the tech/stock bubble. (Or, to paraphrase: the inflation was there, it just wasnt evenly distributed.)
 
posted by Jorge
 on January 28, 2009 #
 
The same is true for economic policy in general; it will typically create jobs in one place, but only at the expense of losing them somewhere else. I agree. The possibility of economic policies that encourage new goods and services (not just new companies providing old goods and services) to come into existence doesnt seem to occur to American policymakers. New companies making old things only shift jobs, as you say; new companies making new things really do create jobs.
 
On the other hand, the notion that America [meaning American companies] isnt competing with anyone is often false. Detroit car makers competed with Japanese car makers. American machine tool makers competed with Chinese machine tool makers. When an American tool company goes bankrupt due to Chinese competition and its workers get lower-paying jobs doing something quite different from what they did for 20 years, you can be sure their productivity goes down.
 
posted by Seth Roberts
 on January 28, 2009 #
 
Aaron, almost everything that you write about economics is BS, though you dont know it. Actually, the more I read you on the topic, the less sense you make, as if you were unlearning daily.
 
Your little inanity about unemployment being 5% to keep employees on their toes is probably the stand-out most ludicrous thing in this essay. 5% is actually a very tight employment market, one in which its very easy for employees to switch jobs. Its an unemployment rate of 15% or 20% that would serve companies better for keeping folks on their toes - but that level of human resources being put to waste would mean a less productive economy as a whole, and thus less wealth to go around.
 
And because of supply and demand, employment rate is almost irrelevant to an economy in an equilibrium. The poorest country in the world could create jobs for all remaining unemployed people very easily. Just set them digging holes with spoons, instead of shovels or digging machines - but they wouldnt be any richer for it.
 
Anyhow, you can look forward to less interruption from me, as your incoherent economic ramblings have gone on too far. I fear youve slipped into some kind of absurdist ideology. You seem to be displaying cult-like paranoid thought patterns, postulating the existence of cadres of wealthy people conspiring to keep people out of work.
 
Im not in the psychotherapist game, but you might want to get that checked out.
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on January 28, 2009 #
 
What disturbs me about this post is not the accuracy or inaccuracy of it, but the grandiose and demagogic tone you are slipping into here.  Gee, thanks Aaron, for laying bare the mysteries of the economic propagandists in a few short, uncited paragraphs.
 
But, as for the accuracy: Do you realize how dumb you look when five minutes of googling turns up graphs that show unemployment bottoming out at 4% in the late 90s, with a sharp up-tick in inflation at the same time? Do you just make this stuff up? (http://data.bls.gov/PDQ/servlet/SurveyOutputServlet, http://inflationdata.com/inflation/images/charts/Annual_Inflation/annual_inflation_chart.htm )
 
posted by Mark
 on January 28, 2009 #
 
Countries dont really do that sort of thing
 
Uhm Actually they sort of do. Read up on Iceland.
 
posted by Mr rlygsson
 on January 28, 2009 #
 
The bit about inflation targeting was becoming a distraction, so I softened it.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 28, 2009 #
 
Mark: Im just trying to summarize research for busy readers. For more details on the Federal Reserve stuff, you could try the Predator State or some Jamie Galbraith papers. For the rest, start with Paul Krugmans Peddling Prosperity.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 28, 2009 #
 
Your problem with the Fed is that it supposedly targets unemployment rates under the guise of keeping inflation low. Assuming you agree with the need for stable low inflation, any frustrations you have with the Fed would end if they simply targeted inflation directly. The Reserve banks of Australia, New Zealand, UK, Canada, South Korea, South Africa have been given a monetary policy of inflation targeting. Its a policy that should be advocated for the Fed.
 
posted by Steve
 on January 28, 2009 #
 
Your understanding of economics is not at a level where you should be writing about the subject authoritatively, but that isnt the major crime here. The minute that any intellectual advises others to actively ignore and distrust people on a subject, they are damaging the core of intellectual curiosity, honesty and transparency that the very existence of the intellectual society depends on.
 
For the fear and ignorance you inspire, you should be ashamed. For your lack of expertise in economics, there are books.
 
posted by Brad Fults
 on January 28, 2009 #
 
Just came back to say something more about 5% unemployment rate being a target for conspiring bankers.
 
Think about frictional unemployment, i.e. the unemployment inherent in people in the process of moving from one job to another, or going from school to the workforce, or at the other end.
 
Just suppose if people were to average 1 month between jobs, and that they change their job once every two years. Assuming that employment turnover is at a constant rate throughout the year, it would mean on average that 1/24th of people are unemployed at any given moment.
 
Thats only a little under 5%, and assumes complete employment - i.e. no long-term unemployed.
 
You can quibble with my assumptions, but youve got to see that mere turnover is a substantial fraction of that famous 5%.
 
Oh, and youre becoming a Marxist. Just thought you might like to know.
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on January 29, 2009 #
 
Sure, frictional unemployment is unavoidable, but why should it be a target? Why not just make unemployment as low as you can?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on February  6, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January 16, 2009
 
Title: Cass Sunstein, Concern Troll
 
[cross-posted to Open Left]
 
Remember when President Bush tried to put more arsenic in our drinking water? Lots of people got outraged  it seemed like a classic example of a deregulator-in-chief helping his corporate friends at our expense. Not Cass Sunstein, a prominent (and nominally-liberal) law professor.
 
Sunstein, working for and with right-wing deregulatory think tanks, published a piece called The Arithmetic of Arsenic, arguing that everyone needs to stop being so emotional about these things. We cant decide whether arsenic should be in our water based on fuzzy-wuzzy arguments about not killing people. No, we need to be hard-headed realists and decide exactly how much a human life is worth and whether filtering arsenic is worth the cost. In short, we have to do cost-benefit analysis.
 
As fellow law prof Tom McGarity pointed out, Sunstein continued to hold this view despite the fact that Sunsteins own research into the subject showed that there was so much uncertainty around the issue that just using different previously-published estimates could result in whatever conclusion you like. And there was no obvious way to decide which estimate to trust.
 
All of this would be just another story in the annals of out-of-touch intellectuals  a law professor who gets off on killing people to save money, actual facts be damned  except for one frightening fact: Barack Obama just put this law professor in charge of cost-benefit analysis for the whole government.
 
The Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) was set up by Ronald Reagan to allow him veto power over any federal regulation. If the EPA wanted to stop companies from poisoning fish, if the DOJ wanted to stop businesses from discriminating, if OSHA wanted to protect miners lungs, OIRA could intervene and double-check their cost-benefit analysis. They could rejigger the numbers to make it so that the regulation got killed or if they failed at that they could just demand more and more research from the agency, delaying the regulation it was finally abandoned.
 
OIRA was one of Reagans most powerful tools for keeping the Federal Government from doing its job. And now someone whos a strong fan of its mission has been put in charge. Its a scary thought, especially as youre going to get a glass of drinking water.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 16, 2009
 
Aaron, grow up. What you just wrote is juvenile drivel of the lowest order.
 
Cost-benefit analysis is essential everywhere, even with respect to human lives - and you yourself make these decisions every day. Every time you get on a bus, get into a car, ride a bicycle, youve made a decision that its worth risking your life to save a few precious seconds over the alternative, carefully creeping along the sidewalk on all-fours (in case you fall) all wrapped up in protective gear (in case you get sun cancer, or a cut from some glass on the ground).
 
Should I ask if you are all in favour of the current fear-mongering and over-hyped security in airports? (I hope you know what Im talking about, since you could hardly be willing to fly with your apparent attitude.)
 
Are you all in favour of security cameras on every street corner? After all, they might save a single life, and thats far more important than any loss of liberty, or the vast cost of instituting such a regimen.
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on January 16, 2009 #
 
Barry, when you get into a car or ride a bike, do you attempt to calculate the value of your life and then the cost of creeping? Of course not; if you did, youd never  get anywhere. I dont see why its any different with regulation. Sure, its always a good idea to double-check our intuitions, but I think we should be able to start taking arsenic out of drinking water without years and years of economic analysis.
 
Im not sure what any of this has to do with airports and security cameras. The alternative to cost-benefit analysis isnt paranoia; its using judgment.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 16, 2009 #
 
Aaron, the issue is not should we take arsenic out of drinking water? (because you cant, its always going to be present at some level), its what is the acceptable level of arsenic?. And to make that decision, you have to know what the cost of achieving that level is, because you have to decide whether to spend that money on water purification or on something else that might save lives.  Not performing CBA would be choosing to be willfully ignorant of whether you could have done more good elsewhere.
 
posted by mark
 on January 16, 2009 #
 
It could be worse.
 
It could be Richard Posner.
 
But, after a quick skim, I do agree youre taking a superficial view. Though Id say the article is problematic, but more along the lines of the right-wing argument of regarding science as just one sort of political interest (intellectual lawyers tend to like that analysis, theyre comfortable with warmed-over sociology).
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on January 17, 2009 #
 
Also, if someone wanted to be charitable, it could be argued that Cass Sunstein was attempting to mildly defang cost-benefit analysis in a language and framework that right-wing policy-makers might take seriously. Remember, in the circles he moves in, theres a severe risk of marginalization to anyone who is a flaming liberal.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on January 17, 2009 #
 
I am with Aaron on this.
 
Balancing costs and benefits sounds rational, but if uncertainties are large then it becomes a way to rationalize a pre-defined course of action. Alternatively, as with marks comment on the level  of arsenic, it becomes a way of postponing a decision.
 
Any decision can be recast from binary (arsenic in the drinking water? Y/N) to a continuum (what level of As in the water will we tolerate, given the continually changing state of what we know about the dangers of As relative to the dangers and costs of other chemicals, the costs of eliminating As compared to the costs of improving air traffic control, and on and on. It is tempting to claim that the continuum problem is the real one, but - speaking as an ex-chemist so I do know about parts per billion - it just aint so.
 
Which is just what Aarons post argued anyway.
 
posted by tom s.
 on January 17, 2009 #
 
This is pure trash.  If we cant have any cost/benefit analysis, then what you are essentially advocating is that we spend our entire GDP on removing every atom of arsenic from our water.  It would be massively expensive, and it would come at the cost of other more effective things, like say, free health care for all.
 
posted by Seth McFinklestein
 on January 19, 2009 #
 
The choice is not between cost/benefit analysis and spending the entire GDP on eliminating arsenic.
 
The alternative is to set a reasonable minimum standard, based on reasonable expert judgement (which aint me), and to go with it. Isnt that, as Aaron points out above, what individuals, political movements, businesses - pretty much every group of people - does with the decisions that matter?
 
Now dont get me wrong. If someone can draw me a meaningful, reliable, objective pair of curves of costs vs benefits then Ill take a look. But in most cases Im not holding my breath waiting.
 
posted by tom s.
 on January 20, 2009 #
 
a reasonable minimum standard, based on reasonable expert judgment
 
The devil is in the details there, which I think is sort of what Sunsteins article is about.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on January 20, 2009 #
 
Aaronwould recommend the work of Aaron Wildavsky for a more systemic view of the necessity of cb analysis. See especially Richer is Sicker vs. Richer is Safer, in which youll no doubt find fault with the model of economic progress, but which nonetheless might attenuate your antagonism toward cba.
 
Sunstein shares your desire for social justice, so why the rancor?
 
posted by Ben Moskowitz
 on January 20, 2009 #
 
Sunstein continued to hold this view despite the fact that Sunsteins own research into the subject showed that there was so much uncertainty around the issue that just using different previously-published estimates could result in whatever conclusion you like.
 
To me, the fact that there is such uncertainty about the safety of arsenic levels tells me that asking what is acceptable is a valid question.  Are you really suggesting that because we dont know for sure, banning the substance from water is the appropriate conclusion?  I cant imagine what kind of world this would create when applied to other vague or gray areas.
 
Of course, longtime readers know you dont often operate in any gray areas.
 
Also, once again, I see no citations.  No source I can follow to verify your information about Sunstein, his research, or who Tom McGarity is and why what he thinks matters.  You very well could be correct, but without sources, this is nothing but a vague opinion piece of obvious bias.
 
posted by Nicole
 on January 20, 2009 #
 
A little research tells me that both Sunstein and McGarity are big names in environmental regulation law, from Harvard and UT respectively.  To save other readers time, here are some pertinent links I found in my quest for complete information.
 
McGaritys Georgetown Law Journal piece: http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qa3805/is_/ai_n9105571
 
Other views on the subject:
http://gristmill.grist.org/story/2009/1/12/1743/95803
http://michaeldorf.org/2009/01/sunstein-on-risk-reason-and-reviewing.html
 
I also now notice that you call out Sunstein for working for and with right-wing deregulatory think tanks, but dont mention that McGarity has his own Center for Progressive Reform think tank.
 
posted by Nicole
 on January 20, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January 12, 2009
 
Title: Why are online ads cheaper?
 
It seems lately, what with the End Times and all, people have been asking why newspapers cant make money online. Obviously online papers dont have circulation fees (subscriptions and newsstand prices) but they dont have circulation costs either (paper, ink, delivery). Circulation fees only make up 20% of newspaper revenue, so all things considered one wouldnt think this would be an existential threat to the business.
 
Craigslist has been a bigger deal; classified ads used to be 40% of newspaper revenue, versus just 30% now. But even magazines, which have never run classifieds, are feeling the pinch.
 
The real issue is that online ad prices per reader are far, far lower than offline prices. But why is that?
 
Ive heard lots of theories, but I think the real explanation is simple: supply and demand. If you want to buy an offline ad, there are only a handful of places you can buy it. As a result, supply is constrained and the price goes up. But online, ad networks let just about everybody sell ads on an equal footing. Practically, it doesnt make that much difference whether your ad appears on nytimes.com or politico.com or eschatonblog.com, as long as it reaches the same person. So supply goes up and the price gets bid down.
 
Most people dont seem to like this explanation, so Ill try phrasing it another way. In the days of paper, to get your ad to people you had to get it on a truck and into their hands on something they would read. Newspapers and magazines could charge a premium for this. Online, you just need to upload an image file.
 
Anyone see any flaws with this theory?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 12, 2009
 
I think this is exactly right. The available inventory is simply much greater online. Sure, its accessible to more advertisers, but with geo-targeting newspapers are now not only competing against other local media but also nytimes.com, espn.com, politico.com, etc. etc.
 
Add this to the fact that theyve lost the classified revenue and its no wonder their screwed!
 
posted by Ryan Schroeder
 on January 12, 2009 #
 
Online, your ad is packed in with more others, so any one ad gets less attention from the reader.
 
In a magazine you get about 20,000 words of articles and about 50 ads.  So figure 400 words per ad.
 
A mainstream media site that puts 400 words of content on a page will have more than one ad  and some of the ads will be animations of many frames.
 
posted by Don Marti
 on January 12, 2009 #
 
Makes sense to me.
 
In addition to the increase in supply, there should also be an increase in demand online because its much easier to place an ad there.  Not enough to make up for the increase in supply though.
 
Maybe the key is to increase the number and types of people who place ads.  AdWords is not necessarily the right context for all potential ad buyers.
 
posted by Jim Gilliam
 on January 13, 2009 #
 
Regrets, this strikes me as too geekily simplistic and triumphalist. I suspect youre mixing in a lot of very subtlely different questions, on top of the problem that theres no easy way to reject an answer which sounds good but is wrong (which is a killer).
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on January 13, 2009 #
 
Philip Weiss, referring to captive advertisers, says the same thing here:
 
http://www.typepad.com/services/trackback/6a00d8341cc8ad53ef010536b7ac41970b
 
So I dont think your explanation is new. But I do think it is correct.
 
The classified ad situation is the same thing: Advertisers were captive there, too, until Craigslist came along.
 
posted by Seth Roberts
 on January 14, 2009 #
 
EwsEww  strcjzbeypeg, [url=http://ojcehnmblzwp.com/]ojcehnmblzwp[/url], [link=http://jfeaoaxlbahr.com/]jfeaoaxlbahr[/link], http://jrhytczlmyya.com/
 
posted by jbvhmhsli
 on January 15, 2009 #
 
FYI:
 
http://www.ethanzuckerman.com/blog/2009/01/16/is-ad-supported-journalism-viable-in-a-pay-for-performance-age/
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on January 18, 2009 #
 
Your explanation imho hits the core of the issue. Still it is more complex and imho even more drastic than you outlined.
 
Example:
The amount of mid-aged readers from 20 - 50 is steadily increasing online. At the same time readers of classical newspapers are slowly decreasing (or for specific papers the increase is less than it should be). This all simply since online is more current and offers more than just letters, but also videos, online comments etc.
 
So it comes down to one target group slowly shifting to online with others following sooner or later. Therefor the demand for print ads is decreasing while supply of online ads is close to unlimited.
 
This would also explainthe huge price gap and why this price gap is increasing even between online and print media.
 
Society is changing.
 
posted by Martin Sauer
 on February  1, 2009 #
 
If online ads allow you to reach more readers at a cheaper price, then why do we even have print ads at all?
 
Because some people dont use the Internet and some people dont look at Internet ads.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on February  6, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January  8, 2009
 
Title: Felten for CTO?
 
[crossposted to Open Left]
 
As inauguration approaches, speculation has been heating up about Obamas pick for the newly-created position of CTO. Most of the names floated  Eric Schmidt, Steve Ballmer, Jeff Bezos  just seem ridiculous (would you really leave being CEO of Google, Microsoft, or Amazon for a White House job?), but Ive recently heard one name thats gotten me excited: Princetons Ed Felten (blog).
 
Felten came to national prominence in 2000, when the music industry held a contest to see if anyone could break their digital watermarking technology. Felten and his team broke it and was about to publish a paper explaining how, when the recording industry threatened to sue him if he did.
 
Since then, hes offered expert opinions on everything from Microsoft to voting machines and started the Center for Information Technology Policy at Princeton, which he directs, where hes pushed for more government transparency. He has the incredibly rare combination of being an absolutely first-rate technologist while also being able to clearly explain all of the relevant policy implications. Like Science Advisor John Holdren, hell do a fantastic job representing the consensus of technical experts on every policy issue that comes his way.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  8, 2009
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January  5, 2009
 
Title: The True Story of the Telephone
 
I grew up in Highland Park, Illinois, just down the street from where the telephone was invented. I now live in Cambridge, Massachusetts, just down the street from where it was stolen. Seth Shulmans recent book The Telephone Gambit lays out the clearest case yet of how it all happened. Heres the summary:
 
Alexander Graham Bell (or Aleck Bell, as he was then called) was the son of Alexander Melville Bell, the inventor of a system of phonic notation called Visible Speech. The elder Bell would use Aleck as an assistant in his demonstrations: After sending Aleck to wait in another room, Mr. Bell would ask the audience for a word or strange noise then write it in Visible Speech. Aleck would return and reproduce the sound from the writing alone. Voila.
 
As a child growing up like this, he played at inventing machines that could talk and telegraphs that could listen. But he found his career in tutoring the deaf  by teaching them to pronounce the phonemes of Visible Speech, he eventually succeeded in teaching them to talk and read lips.
 
One of his students was Mabel Hubbard, daughter of prominent Boston lawyer Gardiner Greene Hubbard. Son of a Massachusetts Supreme Court Justice, Hubbard established water and gas and trolley utilities for Cambridge, Mass.  some of the first in the nation. He also fervently lobbied Congress to replace Western Unions monopoly on the telegraph with a new corporation, the US Postal Telegraph Company, that would contract with the government Post Office.
 
At the time, telegraph wires blanketed the skies of Boston, hanging in a dense web above the buildings. Many desperately wished for someone to develop a telegraph that could send multiple messages over the same wire, so that many wires could be replaced with just one. The theory was that if one could transmit the messages using different tones, they would harmonize instead of interfere, leading the idea to be called the harmonic telegraph. Naturally, Alexander Graham Bell turned his tinkering to this problem and persuaded Hubbard (as well as Thomas Sanders, another father of a Bell student) to finance his research in exchange for a share of any future US profits. Further complicating matters, Bell had fallen in love with his student, Mabel Hubbard. Mr. Hubbard made it clear he did not approve of such a marriage unless Bell made a profitable discovery.
 
But Bell was simply a hobbyist, the real research was being done by a man named Elisha Gray. Gray ran Western Electric, the leading supplier of technical expertise to telegraph monopoly Western Union. From his lab in Highland Park, Illinois, he and his assistants worked feverishly at new discoveries. Bell was well aware of this and considered himself to be in a race with Gray to invent the harmonic telegraph first.
 
In 1875, Bell made a breakthrough in his work on the harmonic telegraph. But he was a crafty fellow  his deal with Gardiner and Sanders was only about splitting US profits; it said nothing about profits overseas. British law at the time granted patents only to inventions not patented elsewhere first, so Bell drew up several copies of his harmonic telegraph patent and sent some to be filed in Britain first. The rest were sent to DC to be filed as soon as word got back from Britain.
 
On February 14, 1876, while the lawyers were waiting in DC to file Bells patent, Gray filed a patent of his own. Bells lawyers were close to the patent officers and had asked to be tipped off if Gray tried to file something, so they could file Bells patent first. When Grays patent was placed in the patent offices inbox, Bells lawyers hand-delivered Bells patent to the examiner, so they could claim hed received Bells first.
 
The patent examiner, Zenas Fisk Wilber, had fought in the civil war with Bells attorney, Marcellus Bailey. Wilber was an alcoholic and owed Bailey money (a serious Patent Office ethics violation). To pay his friend back, he showed him Grays application. Bailey was startled to find it wasnt a patent on a harmonic telegraph at all  it was a patent for a telephone, capable of transmitting all the sounds of human speech and music. He called for Bell to come to DC at once.
 
Bell did, and examiner Wilber showed him Grays patent as well, taking time to explain how it worked. Bell thanked him and returned that afternoon with $100 for his trouble. Bell then quickly scribbled an addition to his patent in the margin, adding that it should also cover transmitting vocal or other sounds telegraphically (this addition does not appear in any of the other copies).
 
Contravening much standard practice at the time, Bells (modified) patent was quickly granted, while Grays was denied. It was issued the same day Bell returned home from DC, March 7, 1876. The following day, Bell drew in his lab notebook a copy of the diagram he had seen in Elisha Grays patent:
 

 
It took Bell several days of tinkering, but soon he was able to replicate Grays device. On March 10, he made that now-famous call: Watson  come here  I want to see you. Both Bell and his assistant Watson recorded the event that night in their notebooks.
 
But Bell didnt want to simply duplicate Grays work; he wanted to invent a telephone of his own. He spent many months trying to develop a telephone that worked on a different principle, but never succeeded in getting it to clearly transmit audible speech. Bell was always extraordinarily reluctant to demonstrate his telephone, for fear that Gray would learn it was a simple copy. Mabel had to trick him into attending the Centennial Exposition, where he was supposed to demonstrate his work to a group of engineers, including Elisha Gray. On one occasion, Bells telephone patent was set to be annulled unless Bell would swear under oath that the invention was truly his. Bell fled the country, testifying only at the last minute after desperate pleading from Mabel.
 
The legal conniving a success, Bell and Mabel were soon married. Feeling guilty, Bell gave all but ten of his shares in the Bell Telephone Company to her and swore to never work in telephony again. The company was operated by Gardiner and others while Bell went back to working with the deaf. He always said he was more proud of his work for the deaf than of the telephone.
 
It took Gray a long time to realize that Bells patent was a fraud. For one thing, he was still focused on the harmonic telegraph; his customers at Western Union couldnt imagine running telephone wires to every house and thus couldnt see how talking over wires was particularly useful. For another, it took years for the story to leak out, through numerous court battles and Congressional hearings. Zenas Fisk Wilbers affidavit confessing to what hed done did not appear until 1886, a decade later. Bells notebooks, making clear the blatant copy, were not made public until the 1990s.
 
Bells biographers have gone to heroic lengths to explain away all the evidence. Refusing credit for the telephone just showed Bells humility; not being involved in the corporation showed his dedication to pure research. The fact that both patents were filed on the same day is a grand historic coincidence  or perhaps Gray stole the idea from Bell.
 
As a result, Gray is forgotten and Bell is remembered as one of historys great inventors  not as he should be: a hobbyist and a fraud, forced by love into stealing one of the greatest inventions of all time.
 
Now playing: Regina Spector - On The Radio
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  5, 2009
 
Interesting story, but Phillip Reis was the one who invented the Telephone first - and Bell saw it, and copied some of his work.
 
posted by Pete
 on January  6, 2009 #
 
Interesting story here , unfortunately its not an isolated case , few year back i read a similar article written by Gladwel about Philio Fransworth  , unsung inventor of Television . you can see same   story with Nichola Tesla . more recently gary killdall was the REAL guy behind DOS but Bill G exploited it .
 
such cases makes me wonder is their a correlation between invention a technology  and providing wide scale commercial acceptance of technology . is inventor ALWAYS right guy to do that ?
 
i am NOT AT ALL saying that there shouldnt be attribution /accredition of inventors work or they shouldnt be rewarded financially but when we see a lot many such example we need to think if our perception of  end to end ownership ( invention to commercialization ) of a new tech needs a revision . 
Gladwells article is here http://gladwell.com/2002/2002_05_27_a_televisionary.htm
 
posted by Prashant Singh
 on January 11, 2009 #
 
@Prashant Fransworth invented the first fully electric TV, it was Baird who invented the first working TV (albeit electro-mechanical). Gladwells article is incorrect on this. And I dont think BillG ever claimed he invented DOS; its common knowledge that MS purchased Patersons QDOS, and that was only developed because SCP didnt know when CP/M was going to be ported to the 8086. Besides, IBM went to DRI first and MS second.
 
posted by Keith Gaughan
 on January 29, 2009 #
 
I find it funny that Bell is well known for the invention of the telephone after all the research I have done on it. Ever since i was probably about eight years old I have always been under the impression that Alexander Graham Bell was in fact responsible for this new technology. Im currently 16 years old and find this article to be an eye opener for people/kids who are in my same position. Now after doing my research I have found that Bell didnt even finish the invention. He was only able to come up with the receiver and couldnt produce a microphone with the abilities to clearly produce sounds that were equivalent to the human voice. I knew that Gray had also invented the telephone but, I had no idea that theories like this are going around. It sounds like a pretty credible story and quite frankly I wouldnt be surprised at all if it was 100% true seeing as though Bell couldnt even finish his invention. I picked this subject for my research paper because I thought it would be a challenging subject to write so much on but evidently now Im able to come up with a 20 page story about not the history of the telephone but the controversy of the telephone.
 
posted by Casey Bouton
 on March  9, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: January  3, 2009
 
Title: 2008 Review of Books
 
Previously: 2007 Review of Books, Books I recommend Without Reservation: 2006
 
I read exactly 100 books this year. I mistakenly told someone over the summer that I read a hundred books a year (I only read 70 last year, although 120 the year before that) and as the new year approached I felt duty-bound to make that true. (This led to spending a lot of New Years Eve in a corner reading, as this list may suggest.)
 
Here are the books (in chronological order), with occasional short comments. Books Im happy to have read are linked. Books I recommend are in bold.
 
Lodge, Changing Places.
 
Typical campus novel fun, but with some great Peoples Park stories.
 
Elster, Political Psychology. Short Elster essay collection. Probably for Elster fans only.
 
The Visible Hand.
 
Tough sledding, but important points. Read my summary.
 
Thaler, The Winners Curse
 
Poundstone, Fortunes Formula
 
Fantastic fun. Math, mafiosi, movies.
 
Freeman, Rawls (parts)
 
MacKenzie, An Engine Not a Camera.
 
I recommend starting with his LRB stuff.
 
Fitch, Solidarity for Sale. For leftists who really love unions. You need to know the flaws to make them better.
 
Hoopes, False Prophets
 
A wonderful series of profiles of the most prominent management theorists going back to slavery and Taylor. The books editorial line is a bit marred by the inability of the author (a B-School prof and manager) to reconcile his belief that management power is unjust and that it is necessary. But solid history and good takedowns of some important figures.
 
Dani Rodrik, Has Globalization Gone Too Far? (lent by Henry Farrell). A good book, but not for general readers.
 
Wilson, To The Finland Station.
 
Really, really good. Edmund Wilson was the incredible writer youd expect and this is his masterpiece.
 
Maurer, The Big Con: The Story of the Confidence Man
 
Luc Santes intro alone is worth the price of the book, but the rest of the book is fantastic as well. Everyone should know about con men. (The BBCs Hustle is obviously a television adaptation of the book.)
 
A Choice Not an Echo: The Inside Story of How American Presidents Are Chosen. Still crazy after all these years, although the whole anti-backroom thing is interesting. I read it to see what you could airdrop on college kids.
 
Khurana, Searching for a Corporate Savior
 
Really, truly great.
 
Is That a Politician in Your Pocket? (skimmed)
 
Elster, Explaining Social Behavior
 
Magical, magisterial masterpiece. (my review; more on Elster)
 
Piven, Challenging Authority. Kind of thin; I glazed over portions.
 
Lodge, Nice Work
 
Typical campus novel fun, but with deeper thoughts about business and finance.
 
Armstrong and Moulitsas, Crashing the Gate
 
Galbraith, The Predator State
 
My summary.
 
Watchmen
 
Brilliant. Wanted to see it before the movie came out.
 
Tilly, Big Structures, Large Processes, Huge Comparisons
 
Mann, Sources of Social Power, Vol. 1
 
Tough reading, but really fascinating stuff.
 
Frank, The Wrecking Crew. Lots of good dirt, but not exactly the most rigorous theoretical argument.
 
Ken Silverstein, Turkmeniscam.
 
Great fun. Not just a great story of investigative journalism, but lots of interesting and important background as well. Im a huge Silverstein fan.
 
DFW, Everything and More.
 
This book is an interesting, but, I think, ultimately unsuccessful experiment. DFW tries to teach math by channelling his favorite math teacher  writing in the style of an excitable lecturer, completely with verbal tics and backtracking (which, in printed form, becomes kind of a running gag).
 
Its certainly not a bad book by any means, but I dont think its really a successful model for how books can teach math.
 
Wodehouse, Psmith in the City. Hilarious. Psmith is a delight. I want to hear him acted but the recent BBC version is dreadful.
 
DFW, Consider the Lobster
 
DFWs suicide hit me very hard. I ended up coping by reading every piece of nonfiction hed ever published. He was a brilliant, tortured man and I see so much of myself in him. His nonfiction was fantastic and I will consider my life a success if I can do half of what he did.
 
If you want to get started, I recommend (best work first):
 
Krugman, Peddling Prosperity
 
Probably Krugmans best book, it provides a throughly enjoyable and enlightening intellectual overview of the economics of the 1980s and 1990s. The delicious takedown of supplysiders is worth the book alone, but the rest is great too.
 
Tough, Whatever It Takes. A great read; a bit overly credulous  doesnt address Keynesian critics of intervention or betray much skepticism about tests. (my review)
 
Love at Goon Park.
 
The first section is a (confessed!) retread of Becoming Attached, one of my very favorite books (a 2006 highlight). But after that it gets much better and the interplay of animal and human stories is a lot of fun. Ive been reading it to the five-year-old, who loves animal stories of all sorts, and she just laps it up. (I skip the incredibly dark parts, of course.)
 
Newsweek, Secrets of the 2008 Campaign (full text online). For campaign junkies only.
 
Perlstein, Tested.
 
Very good. (my review)
 
Keynes, Economic Consequences of the Peace (full text online).
 
Wow, Keynes knows how to write. The first section is a must-read for any diplomat. Chapters 4 and 5 (which unfortunately are the bulk of the book) are only worth skipping or skimming for modern readers.
 
Kaufman, Synecdoche, New York (scripts). What a movie! There were a lot of script reviews that said things along the lines of I dont know if movies can capture a script this complex. Reading the script now, you see the exact opposite is the case. The script is a pale imitation of the film, missing most of what made the film magical. Which just underscores what a great movie it was.
 
Bowles and Gintis, Schooling in Capitalist America.
 
Not the easiest read, but brilliant. One of the very very few books I want to read again (in this case, because I am sure I didnt get it all the first time). The definitive Marxist take on education.
 
Smile When Youre Lying
 
Tons of fun. I hate traveling and have never cracked a travel book, but this angry and profane insiders evisceration of the industry was still a complete joy. Read Ezras review  with a comment from the author!.
 
DFW, A Supposedly Fun Thing Ill Never Do Again.
 
Brilliant. Just brilliant.
 
Keynes, Essays in Persuasion.
 
Douthat, Privilege (lent by Rick Perlstein).
 
What is wrong with Ross Douthat? This book is eminently mockable, but I have to say I could see writing most of it myself. Which is weird, since Douthat is a staunch conservative and Im a crazy-far-leftist. Is Douthat a double-agent? Or is he really this confused about what conservatism is about? I wrote this summary for Rick:
 
Prologue: Harvard is actually an education in the ruling class. [Ross didnt like Harvard so much.]
 
1: Diversity policies ensure all sorts of ethnicities get accepted but they all come from the upper class. [Big black homeless guy starts living in Rosss dorm.]
 
2: The real ruling class gets tapped for private clubs where they get connected to wealthy alumni and rape attractive coeds. [Ross gets invited to apply at various clubs and rejected.]
 
3: Students are aggressive social climbers, calibrating who they talk to and what activities they join to maximize their resume. [Rosss friends friend gets arrested for embezzling.]
 
4: Persuaded that the market is God and academia is a sideshow, professors give students easy grades to help them get good jobs and be rich (thus proving the professors worth). Courses are poorly taught and maddeningly specific  its very difficult to get a solid general education. [Ross doesnt like his classes and gets mediocre grades.]
 
5: Random drunken hookups are so common that the only way to get any kind of commitment is to fall into a college marriage (of which, I must say, there is a beautiful description pp. 145-147). [Ross falls head-over-heels for a totally agonizing tease, only to have her give it up months later to a preppy sailing kid who gets her drunk.]
 
6: Most harvard students arrive virgins and have a hards time getting any while theyre there, out of awkwardness and fear of threatening their spot in the overclass. [Ross cant even get laid at an all-girls school.]
 
7: The student body is primarily New Democrat, with a smattering of vocal leftist protestors. [Ross supports the living wage movement. [ed. note: wtf?]]
 
8: Harvard students spend summers at elite internships acclimating to their future careers. [Ross goes sailing with William F. Buckley!]
 
9: 9/11 sucked. [Ross laps up the patriotic spirit and the Summers presidency.]
 
and then a tearfelt ending.
 
Sorry, did I end up mocking it a little?
 
Gore, Sammys Hill. Yes, I have a weakness for chick lit.
 
DFW and Mark Costello, Signifying Rappers.
 
A great book, although surprisingly the best parts are written by Costello. A dense intermixed weave of music, history, race, law, fantasia, and brilliant writing.
 
The Telephone Gambit. Decently researched, mixed in with self-indulgent (and just plain bad) autobiography about writing the book. I wrote up a summary of the story which Ill be publishing soon and you should probably just read that instead. But everybody should agree that Bell stole the telephone from Gray after this book.
 
Searle, The Campus War (full text online).
 
Actually, a really good book on the campus uprisings of the 1960s. First, theres some terrific first-hand reporting from Searles experience at Berkeley (in which he participated in all three sides: the uprising, the faculty response, and the administration counterattack!). Second, theres some good secondhand summarizing about the experience at other campuses. Third, theres some good analysis about why campus uprisings happen and what they mean. Fourth, there are some interesting proposals for reforming the university. (I, too, want to get rid of the trustee system.) Makes me wish Searle did more non-philosophy books!
 
Haggis-on-Whey, Animals of the Ocean (In Particular, the Giant Squid). Not as good as the original (now in its third edition!).
 
Happy new year!
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  3, 2009
 
Ive updated my comments on V. It used to read:
 
I know Moore fervently disagrees, but I actually think the movie was better than the book (even if it dropped the computer hacking). This whole story about how the movie softened the fascism and anarchism seems completely bogus.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January  4, 2009 #
 
What, you skimmed something thats only 41 two-column pages? I am shocked and appalled (and organized and targetted and coloured).
 
posted by Joe Clark
 on January  4, 2009 #
 
love these posts, aaron
 
posted by joe
 on January  4, 2009 #
 
Hey Aaron,
 
Great list. Thanks.
 
Have you checked out The Working Life: The Promise and Betrayal of Modern Work by Joanne B. Ciulla? Seems like youd enjoy it with the recommendation of False Prophets.
 
posted by Brandon
 on January  4, 2009 #
 
Yes, I have a weakness for chick lit.
 
Given all of your insecurity with race, I was shocked that you could be so sexist.
 
posted by Barbara Knight
 on January  4, 2009 #
 
Feyerabend was a professor at Berkeley during the 60s. His Killing Time has some (short) stories about the time in which Searle doesnt come off well. I wonder how the two accounts compare?
 
(Killing Time is a so-so autobiography, though Feyerabend certainly was a strange person and lived a strange life.)
 
posted by Brian Marick
 on January  4, 2009 #
 
Do you buy all these books or do you use the library?
 
posted by Will
 on January  7, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: December 29, 2008
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 12
 
part of Bubble City
 
Hello? asked the woman at the reception desk. The lobby was filled with colorful baubles  lava lamps and bouncy balls, comfy sofas and computer terminals, and a minifridge stocked with a wide variety of Odwalla beverages. The whole thing was calibrated perfectly to seem somehow relaxed yet ostentatious at the same time.
 
Hello? the receptionist asked again, a little less patient this time. She was an attractive woman, Wayne thought  mid-twenties, straight brown hair, thick-rimmed glasses perched atop a prominent nose  he struggled to focus. Uh, yes, hello there, he finally said.
 
What brings you to Google today? she asked.
 
Oh, uh, Im here to seeI mean, I guessI have a meeting.
 
She stared a bit, then nodded. I see. Can I ask with whom?
 
Samuel Boxton. Hes expecting me.
 
Of course. And your name?
 
Wayne Darnus.
 
Thanks, Wayne. Itll just be a moment while I ring him. In the mean time, can you sign in on this computer? She pointed to a terminal on top of the desk before tapping a few keys, apparently connecting the hands-free headset she was already wearing.
 
The terminal asked for his name, employer, host, and signature (for the mandatory non-disclosure agreement, of course), before printing out a badge he was encouraged to affix to his chest, marking him as an interloper.
 
Yes, Mr. Darnus here to see you, the receptionist was saying. 42 Lobby. Of course. She turned to Wayne. Hell just be a minute  please take a seat.
 
On the coffee table were the various usual industry magazines, which Wayne thumbed through nervously before putting them back down. He scanned the walls, which were covered in various plaques and puff pieces and commendations. He begun to feel very small and felt his heart beat a little more quickly. Why did a place designed to seem so friendly actually seem to make him feel scared?
 
Waynes eyes made several more circuits around the room and through the magazines before Samuel suddenly arrived, bright and cheerful as anything. Wayne! Good to see you! he exclaimed.
 
Wayne jumped up, extending an arm. But Samuel went in for a full embrace  not something Wayne was used to; usually the situation was reversed.
 
Look, Samuel said, right this way. Samuel led him out of the lobby and into the courtyard. They went past the endless swimming pool and the volleyball court, the dinosaur skeleton and model rocketship  all glinting in the sun. As they went further, the buildings became more bland and boxy, across parking lots and service ways and sidestreets, parts of the sprawling Google campus normal visitors rarely saw.
 
They entered another building through a backdoor, Samuel swiping his keycard to get in. After that came a maze of twisty little passageways, with little in the way of signage to help distinguish between them. They came to a series of metal doors labeled AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY which this time required a palm-print. Finally, they reached a conference room labeled 10^2 - e^i.
 
Take a seat, Samuel offered.
 
Wayne did, grabbing a seat and the end of a long conference table. Samuel grabbed one around the corner from him, a large projector filling the wall at his back.
 
So, Wayne, I understand you have some concerns, he offered. Can we talk about them?
 
Concerns? Wayne said nervously. Oh, no  Im not sure what you mean.
 
Really? Nothings been bothering you? Heres your chance to have it out with the big guys  we here at Google are all ears!
 
No, really, I think Googles been doing a great job.
 
Look, Wayne, Samuel said, sliding a mouse and keyboard in front of him. With a couple of taps here, I can get you any Google employee you want. Is there really nothing at all you have to say to them? Samuel was looking Wayne straight in the eye.
 
Uh, hmm, well, its a very generous offer you have there, but, uh  I really just cant think of anything right now. Uh, heh, if only youd given me time to prepare! A-heh-heh. Im sure I could have thought of plenty of things!
 
Im really sorry to hear you say that, Wayne. Because a funny thing happened this morning. I was just doing some regular user analysis on our Google Videocast software  nothing out of the ordinary, of course  and I just happened to come across this little clip.
 
Samuel tapped a few keys and there, in full-screen video, was Wayne, his head filling the whole back wall, then repeated in miniature on various screens across the room. Wayne recognized the video and his stomach began to sink:
 
I know Ive been a supporter of Google in the past. But I think theyve finally crossed the line.
 
Ive recently received information that they are chasing and persecuting a young kid just beca
 
Wayne slunk into his seat.
 
Now, I hope you understand my predicament, Wayne, Samuel said. As part of Google Evangelism, its my job to ensure that the world thinks only the best of Google. That they see all the good things were doing for the world. That they see all the progress were inspiring.
 
Because of Google products, billions of dollars have been added to the global economy, people are sharing and communicating more than ever before, kids in Africa now get a chance to read every book in the libraries of Harvard. Samuel looked wistful. Its really some amazing stuff. And Im proud just to be a part of it.
 
Which is why I cant let you jeopardize all that, he said, turning serious. Especially not by repeating some crazy story I told you over drinks. No, theres just too much at stake.
 
Look, Im a good person. Here at Google were all good people. Dont be evil is our motto, for goodness sake. But doing whats good isnt the same as doing whats easy. Sometimes making the right decisions requires doing things that are really very hard. An this is one of those situations.
 
We all love you here at Google, Wayne. And weve always been eager to support you  surely you know that more than anyone. But I think weve reached a point in our relationship where it might be best to keep you a little closer. Samuel smiled.
 
Closer? Wayne said, finally. What do you mean?
 
Samuel reached underneath the desk for something. Why dont you wait right here a minute and well show you. Just a sec! Then he got up and walked down the hall and thru the large metal doors, leaving Wayne and his visitors badge behind him.
 
Trent felt the wind riffling through his hair, the top down on his BMW 328i. He was heading north, past the San Francisco traffic, across he beauty of the Golden Gate Bridge, through the gorgeous hills and valleys of Marin, to the spacious beauty of Napa.
 
The life of a technology executive was stressful, which is why these work-related getaways were so important. It seemed like every month there was some kind of executive retreat up here  a place where the Important Men of Business could get away from it all, loosen their ties, and swap stories in the golden California sun.
 
They were roughin it.
 
He parked his car on the gravel, before heading to the courtyard where a suited caterer was pouring drinks. Whiskey sour, he ordered, before looking for somewhere to mingle.
 
Hey, Trent! Its so good to see you. A man he didnt quite recognize grabbed him by the shoulder. Thank you so much for coming  its a real treat to have you.
 
Of course, of course! Trent replied. How could I resist another chance to visit a beautiful place like this? He gestured around him.
 
Well, just make yourself at home. Weve got some time to chat until six and then well all be heading into town for dinner.
 
I cant wait.
 
The fellow, who was apparently the host, smiled and headed off in search of other people to welcome.
 
Don, from Google, someone said, extending a hand.
 
Trent, from Newsflip, Trent replied.
 
Ahh, Newsflip  Ive heard a lot of good things about you, Don said.
 
Oh, well, Im very glad to hear that. We always look up to our friends down in the Valley.
 
Actually, Don said, Im not going to be down there for long. I just got word that Im going to be one of the lucky few who can transition to our upcoming San Francisco office.
 
Really? Well, congratulations!
 
Thank you. You know, actually, we have an interesting meeting coming up on NNA-related issues at Google Mountain View. You really should attend.
 
Oh, fascinating. Ill definitely send a programmer or two.
 
No, this is a very high-level summit. Just CEOs and above. Obviously the top people from our side will be there as well.
 
Interesting, Trent said. He was always a sucker for networking. Id love to come.
 
Fantastic  Ill call your assistant and be sure to get it set up. Theres just one thing I should warn you about, though.
 
Oh, really? Whats that?
 
After you visit us at Google, you may never want to leave!
 
They both laughed, although Don rather harder.
 
Trent scanned the courtyard for other people he should speak to, but nobody seemed particularly appealing. He decided to sneak into a group standing by the corner, laughing wildly.
 
Thats a great idea, someone was saying. In fact, maybe we should hold all our meetings at strip clubs from now on.
 
Well, you know what I say, another man added. If they cant hold their liquor, how can you expect them to hold a job?
 
Trent just smiled and nodded.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 29, 2008
 
Only a year or so late!
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 29, 2008 #
 
Nice. I almost thought that Google made you stop writing it. Looking forward for more.
 
posted by Andrew
 on December 29, 2008 #
 
Really nice story, I thought you had stopped.
 
Conference Room 10^2 - e^i = 101
 
thats nice.
 
posted by Osama ALASSIRY
 on December 31, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: December 11, 2008
 
Title: The Forgotten Sidekick
 
Its been a frustrating year for us Sidekick users. It seems like every television show, periodical, and man in the street is raving about the amazing world-changing capabilities of the iPhone (and, to a lesser extent, the Google Phone). How having a device that can conveniently surf the Web, answer email, run third-party applications and fit in your pocket is as big a technological breakthrough as hovercars.
 
Which is infuriating to those of us who have been using a superior device for the past five years.
 
From the very first demo of the iPhone, it was obvious it was a knockoff of the Sidekick. The UI demo Steve Jobs did  calling two people and then merging the calls  is the exact same demo Id given to all my friends to show off the incredible UI polish and attention to detail by the Sidekick developers. Sure, there were some differences  most notably that Apples artists had prettied up the iPhone UI as compared to the 8-bit basement wackos who drew up the Sidekicks  but it was clear that this was an evolutionary change, not the revolutionary leap everyone made it out to be.
 
And, when I bought an iPhone, it became clear it wasnt even an improvement. The touch-keyboard made it impossible to type anything at length (I regularly composed whole articles on my Sidekick), the lack of multitasking made it impossible to queue up articles in the Web browser and read them on the subway (I read several books on the Sidekick), instant messages werent even supported, and the swipe-to-scroll method quickly grew tiresome. Within a couple weeks, I sold the phone to a friend (although not before getting an outrageous roaming bill from AT&T because the iPhone couldnt keep its mouth shut).
 
For those two weeks, though, I was repeatedly stopped and gawked at by well-dressed people in airports and trains. They all wanted to know Is that the iPhone? and How is it? By contrast, those people, when they saw me using the Sidekick, assumed it was a videogame device.
 
But it wasnt as if the Sidekick was unheard of. As soon as I wandered out of the land of white folks in suits-and-ties, black and latino kids would rush up to me and gab about the Sidekick. During one trip, a latina middle-schooler stopped me on the sidewalk and asked if Id gotten the latest firmware update yet. It has JavaScript support! she enthused. Browsing the Sidekick user forums bore this out  it was all black and latino schoolchildren.
 
But, of course, neither minorities nor schoolchildren rule the world, so the Sidekick has been written out of history. 2007 was the first time anyone had thought to give a smartphone a decent UI, or a web browser, or an over-the-air application store. Well, at least it was the first time anyone thought to tell white people.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 11, 2008
 
The Sidekick was fantastic. I was an over-enthusiastic fan since the day they came out and used Sidekicks for about 3-4 years. In my opinion, the problem with their demise wasnt their fault, it was T-Mobiles. Danger wanted to continue developing a kick-ass device and T-Mobile wanted to make the device hip to the hip hop crowd and ballers. One would think you could have both but the features in later models were driven more by T-Mobile and T-Mobile would actually suppress features that were available on the Hiptop in other markets.
 
It was no surprise that Andy Rubin and others left Danger to start Android.
 
posted by Aaron Landry
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I owned both the sidekick 2 and 3. They were great machines, I loved being able use AIM, and the keyboard was amazing. However for me there were a few things that really killed it for me:
 
size and form factor. Sorry, the freaking thing was huge and beefy. For those of us without purses, it was a PITA.
 
Media player  personally I like listening to music and I like carrying only one device. Its just way easier on the iPhone.
 
With regards to the keyboard  when the iPhone does let you use the keyboard in landscape mode (which is exceedingly rare), its actually not that bad. Theres definitely a rabid group of iPhone users out there who are clamoring and praying for expanded use of the landscape mode.
 
posted by Alex
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I dont think the racial overtone youre attributing is entirely fair; Paris Hilton was a well-known Sidekick user, and you dont get much whiter. Though I accept your core point: the Sidekick wasnt seen as a serious phone. I wonder if thats because its better at texting than voice, and tech journalists dont take texting seriously?
 
posted by Keith
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I know we all seem to think what we have is the best, but I had a sidekick, then moved to blackberry, and now an iPhone. The sidekick is indeed revolutionary for its time, but doesnt even compare to the iPhone (post app store era). I use my iPhone as my store rewards cards, I make restaurant reservations via open table, it encompasses my iPod, visual voicemail, recognizes songs, has voice search, integrated google maps with street view, acts as a pedometer, a multitude of games that require a touch screen, syncs over the air to my google calendar and contacts- I can go on and on but I think thats enough to discount an iPhone comparison. I typed all this in about a minute. You just have to get used to it.
 
posted by Robin
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I know we all seem to think what we have is the best, but I had a sidekick, then moved to blackberry, and now an iPhone. The sidekick is indeed revolutionary for its time, but doesnt even compare to the iPhone (post app store era). I use my iPhone as my store rewards cards, I make restaurant reservations via open table, it encompasses my iPod, visual voicemail, recognizes songs, has voice search, integrated google maps with street view, acts as a pedometer, a multitude of games that require a touch screen, syncs over the air to my google calendar and contacts- I can go on and on but I think thats enough to discount an iPhone comparison. I typed all this in about a minute. You just have to get used to it.
 
posted by Robin
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
From the very first demo of the iPhone, it was obvious it was a knockoff of the Sidekick.
 
You lost me at this ridiculous statement - was it the iPhones flip up screen or physical keyboard that screamed Sidekick knockoff to you?
 
If you are happy using your Sidekick, then more power to you, but all the whining that other people dont think your device is cool is pretty pathetic.
 
posted by sfmitch
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I was a sidekick user before switching to iPhone. It was fun while it lasted and had a lot going for it, but I dont miss its size, build quality (the all plastic everything made for a lot of scratches), unpretty UI and graphics quality, lack of media player, and inelegant sync to my Mac.
 
posted by josh
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Just shut up & quite your whining. Youre living proof that sidekick users are just a bunch if brats who has nothing better to do with their time. As for the black & Latino comment, guess most of those with such ethnic backgrounds are brats too.
 
posted by Jeff
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Thanks, Ive been meaning to write essentially this article for months now.
 
If youve ever programmed the Sidekick, youd find all this doubly annoying. Data stores, automatically synced over the network, all the time. Tens of apps running all the time in 32 MB RAM. Seamless data sharing, a real clipboard, even multiple undo in text editing. None of this single-tasking crap in 128 MB RAM or need to run your own backend service just so your data persists.
 
Unfortunately around the time of the Sidekick 3, with the exception of the improvements from moving to 2D navigation, the UI started to suck (examples: the incredibly complex but obnoxious to use music player; the Bluetooth support). Of course that just happened because of the mass exodus from Danger.
 
Whats worse is that nobody learned enough from the Sidekick.  The comments above just demonstrate the typical response to the platform, which was more or less the result of the target demographic and poor marketing.  My 65-year-old-mom had a Sidekick too, and loved it.
 
I finally gave in and bought an iPod touch a few weeks ago, and Im beginning to get used to its usage patterns, but Id certainly never try to do messaging on it.
 
And yeah, if T-Mobile hadnt been so short-sighted, the Sidekick would have been the iPhone.
 
posted by Nicholas Riley
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Maybe you should try the iPhone again. A lot of your problems have been solved with 3rd party applications or software updates.
 
posted by Cameron Hunt
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Ive never owned an iPhone or a Sidekick, but for what its worth, I immediately thought Paris Hilton when I heard Sidekick, too.  My second association is with tween girls.  And whoever they sell Bratz to.  So I guess that would probably fall in with your argument a little.  But I think you may have been a little knee jerk in the racial department.  I think its a class boundary at work in the demographic here, not a racial one.  The racial thing, of course, is implicit, but there you go.
 
posted by Jonathan
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I feel your pain but the reality is that gadgets and any other consumer product are much more than pure technical capability. After all, why do Mac fans love their computers - certainly not because they can do more - but because the way they do it is easier or more visually appealing or whatever.
 
Beta was better technically but lost to VHS for non-technical reasons. Apple markets to an audience that for the most part buys on experience not technology - the two are NOT one in the same. MS prides itself on tech and just copies Apples UI lead. Which one is the better business to be in? Time will tell.
 
The iPhone is a success not necessarily because it IS better technically but because the market BELIEVES it is. Thats business axiom that none of us will ever change - ever.
 
I personally switched from Blackberry to iPhone and although its pretty sexy I have some serious issues with it. The email client is poor and the lack of an option to turn off loading images is just stupid if not downright dangerous. If they dont fix that and a few other things Im going back to BB. But will the few that care about those things matter to the overall market?
 
This is just business and I think your racial comments are unwarranted. Of all the companies I know Apple is one of the few that is a leader in addressing concerns of minorities (language/disabilites etc).
 
You may be right, Apple wasnt the first. Hell, everyone thinks MS stole the mouse idea from Apple but Apple stole it from Xerox PARC. Personally I dont care or have the energy to worry about whos first or why. Its good to know the truth but in the end - does it really matter?
 
posted by Steve
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
As a former Treo user turned iPhone user, I feel your pain, sort of.  Its certainly true that the iPhone was nowhere near as revolutionary as its press releases insisted, but instead built carefully on a base that Palm and Danger had built carefully over the last 5-10 years.
 
But thats the way the cookie crumbles.  Palm spent ten solid years shooting themselves in the foot so often than theyre now hobbling on stumps by failing to execute on not one but three next-gen OS strategies.  Danger had a great prototype, but ended up being forced to tie themselves to the sinking, un-captained ship that is T-Mobile.  Apple waited until the right moment and then pounced, synthesizing (mostly) the best of everyone elses ideas at a time when the underlying hardware had matured to the point when the vision could be implemented with fewer compromises, and combined that with enough retail muscle to beat a carrier into submission.
 
Dont mourn, organize: the Android SDK is there, waiting to be downloaded.
 
posted by Doctor Memory
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Its the formfactor, feel, and weight.  The Sidekick never felt right in my hands, and always felt entirely too bulky.
 
posted by Joseph
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I used to read articles like this from Amiga owners, comparing their computers to early Macs. They had some good points, but the Amiga is gone. The Sidekick will be soon as well.
 
posted by Bruce McL
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
yeah damn the white man and his iphones brother preach it
 
posted by 
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I owned a Sidekick 1 and now I have an iPhone. The Sidekick was, no doubt, an amazing device for its time. But the quality, fit-and-finish, and nearly every measurement is outdone by the iPhone.  Thats the way it goes sometimes.
 
posted by Billy Brandon
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
wow, i spent a bunch of this time on nokia/symbian, which, if judged by reading this, seems overly marketed to aliens and never made it down the gravity well. i finally gave up due to a complete dearth of US support and moved to BB, after less than a week with an iphone i hated. but theres a lot i miss about my nokia still. i loved the little apps out there, and the fact that my nokia worked as a phone for me, and the other smart phones dont do anywhere near as well. also they take gorgeous pictures- even at low res, they are just prettier than anyone elses. nokias are indestructible, and i tried. i never wrote on anything on a phone as long and well as i did on my e61i, and opera was a dream.
 
and a cntl key! none of you can step to that.
 
ok, ive made myself sad now.
 
posted by quinn
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Jealous?
 
posted by Chris
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Maybe in the US this all matters. Outside the US?
 
posted by d
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
dont let anyone tell you there wasnt a racial bias.  there was.
and a class bias.  and a bias against tweeners, too, especially
girls who pasted those glitter doo-dads all over the machine.
 
the sidekick was kickass, and i never could understand why
nobody seemed to notice it, including the gadget freaks
 
-bowerbird
 
posted by bowerbird
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Steve said: Hell, everyone thinks MS stole the mouse idea from Apple but Apple stole it from Xerox PARC.
 
The mouse was not invented by Xerox, but by Douglas Engelbart, who presented it in 1968. Xerox came up with several other ideas which Apple licensed (not stole) from Xerox. Apple also added a bunch of significant ideas to the Mac OS which had never been done before.
 
Overall, if you look at the UI of the original Mac, it was probably 1/3 from Engelbart and other early inventors, 1/3 from Xerox, and 1/3 from Apple.
 
Heres a popular story article on this subject:
http://www.folklore.org/StoryView.py?project=Macintosh&story=On_Xerox,_Apple_and_Progress.txt
 
posted by Tom Ross
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
My problem with the Sidekick (and I got my BWSK the day they came out, continued on to the color and SK2) was that the hardware was such amazing garbage.  I had my BWSK replaced 6 times, finally with a color.  I went through 4 colors before upgrading to the SK2.  I went through 3 SK2s before giving up on the platform altogether.
 
The phones would be fine for a month or so, but eventually calls would get noisier and noisier, the scroll wheel or screen would fail, or the screen flip switch would fail.  I was so frustrated by their complete inability to make decent hardware (even after the switch to Sharp) that I ended up replacing it with a generic Samsung non-smartphone which actually worked 100% of the time (for years).
 
posted by Sean Graham
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
With Tom Ross here.
 
I went through three Sidekicks - two SK2s and one SK3 - and they all each developed some issue(s), be it the screen, the keyboard, the swiveling of the screen, actual calls, all to the point where they were no longer useful.
 
The OS and interface was good enough for me but their hardware is garbage. Ill never buy another Sidekick.
 
posted by e
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I had a Hiptop 2 for a couple of years and quite enjoyed it. When I had the opportunity to move to an iPhone however, I jumped at it without looking back. The hiptop did a bunch of stuff better such as typing and background IM handling. Additionally the third party applications seemed to have a lot more flexibility than they do on the iPhone. Overall however, the iPhone is so much nicer to use. Almost every day I access one website or another that works smoothly on the iPhone that would not work (or be incredibly painful) on the Hiptop. I love the iPod aspect to the iPhone, that the hiptop cannot compete with. While there was an on-phone application store, there was only one or two free apps (which both sucked) and everything else was very expensive and ugly on the iPhone however, there are hundreds of free apps, and dozens of great free applications. Additionally the paid ones are largely inexpensive enough to buy without having to think about it too much.
 
Anyway, while I can agree with the argument that many of the innovations of the iPhone were originally available in the Hiptop, I think that the Hiptop is so far behind today that it is unfair to the hiptop to compare them.
 
posted by Colin McKellar
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Im going to have to chime in with the others and say that the sidekick had great potential but was really just junk. Have you ever seen a sidekick after its been used heavily? The keyboards fall apart, it shows every little scratch, and the screens are constantly breaking off. Every sidekick user I know has gone through multiple phones due to how poor the construction is. Those people also happen to be white, which I also think is a complete non-issue here. They are bulky and were never pocket-worthy. And I rarely saw anybody using anything besides the default applications, and the only people that seemed to love them were the ones who would rather type on AIM in social situations than actually converse with those around them. And as someone else pointed out, the iphone does not resemble the sidekick in form whatsoever.
 
posted by Justin
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I loved my sidekicks (over 12 of them due to crummy build quality) but there was a distinct lack of revolution between each model. I started a month after release with the b/w and continued to support the platform until the LX. It was disappointingly easy to predict what the next model would have. Whether this was Danger or Tmobiles fault was moot.
 
Speaking as a developer with published apps on both platforms the hiptop was a dream to program for in terms of power. You were not sandboxed at all like you are on the iPhone. However the iPhone obviously has way more storage guaranteed so apps can be very complex.
 
In response to your article, the sidekick was never as mainstream as the iPhone because of marketing and buzz. The original sidekick release barely made any noise, compare that to the original iPhone release which had people salivating for months after the announcement and months before that with insane rumors. I do miss my sidekick a lot, however after kicking my aim habit I was able to adapt quite well to the iPhone. I also think your racial comparisons are coming from left field, Tmobile markets to the hip-hop demographic, not any ethnicity in particular.
 
posted by Brandon
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Posted by STEVE:
Apple markets to an audience that for the most part buys on experience not technology - the two are NOT one in the same. MS prides itself on tech and just copies Apples UI lead. Which one is the better business to be in? Time will tell.
 
This statement is seriously laughable. Apple is ahead of the game on both User Experience AND Technology. Microsoft got lucky and very early in the game. Steve got kicked out of Apple just when it was beginning which hobbled Apple greatly. Just because Microsoft can write bigger checks doesnt make them a better tech company.
 
And the which one is the better business to be in, time will tell nonsense shows just where your head is  Money. You and Ballmer would be great buds, sitting back, tipping a few and talking about them greenbacks and its what speaks of success. And yet, you two would be wrong.
 
As far as MS and their pride on tech  what did Vista bring to the table but (as Steve recently put it) a Bag of Hurt? Apples OS is perfect, but they are hard at work at bringing serious changes to it with Snow Leopard. Their computers are nothing short of beautiful and ANYTHING you can do on a PC can be done better, faster and with greater pleasure on a MAC, including running Windows.
 
Yes, MS copies Apple - as do many of the companies who are now clamouring to answer Apples iPhone.
 
Id rather be in the company of those who are actually innovating.
 
posted by James Gowan
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Posted by STEVE:
The iPhone is a success not necessarily because it IS better technically but because the market BELIEVES it is. Thats business axiom that none of us will ever change - ever.
 
Steve, so  since greenbacks and business axioms are you thing, put your money where your mouth is and tell us what phone you think IS better technically. Id love to hear.
 
As long as people can get Free phones with their services, we may never knows what everyone would truly prefer. Millions untold go for the inferior free tech. So its not about people always getting the best tech  ever. With 3G and GPS and the App Store, the iPhone is certainly ONE of the best phones available, you have to give it that. I think the browser experience is tops and Video and Audio has certainly never been better on any other phone. Having access to the WiFi iTunes store (and 7 or 8 million songs) is certainly another huge feather in Apples cap.
 
And Steve, remember: better is not just a laundry list of features.
 
posted by James Gowan
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I always wanted to love the sidekick, it SHOULD have been great but it was just SO closed.
Maybe I just wasnt aware of it but the hacker dev community on the iphone is great and opens up so many possibilities. With the sidekick I couldnt even get my im type of choice.
Of course I was in Australia at the time and getting a sidekick at all was difficult.
 
posted by scott parsons
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I cant help but see this blog post as nothing more than the bitter ranting of a sore loser that possibly has racial issues to deal with.
 
Really, anyone thats going to make the case that the iPhone is a knock off of a side kick is just absurd.  I appreciate you mentioning that up front as lose your credibility right up front.  In this way, the rest of the article can be read strictly for entertainment purposes.
 
Im not knocking the Sidekick.  Its a decent phone.  No doubt, there will be some things that it (and many other competitors) do better than the iPhone.  However, taken as a whole, the iPhone is in a class by itself.  From a user experience perspective, the iPhone has set the bar so high that other decent phones simply fall of the radar as they just dont matter.  That may be a harsh reality, but it is reality nonetheless.  It is software that distinguishes one smart phone from another.  Few companies understand this are are equipped to challenge Apple here.  RIM has a lot of momentum going and will be a player for quite a while primarily due to the corporate market.  Android is the only OS that currently has the potential to compete.  As weve seen from the G1, they still have a bit of polish to before theyre a real challenger.
 
posted by Steve
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
@Steve: Beta was better technically but lost to VHS for non-technical reasons.  Apple markets to an audience that for the most part buys on experience not technology - the two are NOT one in the same. MS prides itself on tech and just copies Apples UI lead. Which one is the better business to be in? Time will tell.
 
As with the claim that Apple borrowed its UI from PARC, your first claim is an urban legend.  More importantly, your distinction is a false one, a point Apple continually tries to make.  The UI  the experience  is not something that one slaps on top of technology, but something that must be integrated into the whole.  Otherwise you get horrid inventions like the Blackberry Storm.
 
In a testing laboratory, Beta (supposedly) had higher picture quality, but thats not the same thing as being better technically.  (In the real world, on the shelf at the store, consumers couldnt tell much difference in quality.)  More importantly, though, is that Beta tapes had little capacity.  You couldnt put a whole movie on one; it only could hold one hour of video.  Thats not a non-technical reason.  Thats experience, which is a technical reason.
 
Dont confuse something like the color of an iPhone with the design of it.  The former may be non-technical; the latter is not.
 
posted by David Nieporent
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
@Steve:
 
The iPhone is a success not necessarily because it IS better technically but because the market BELIEVES it is. Thats business axiom that none of us will ever change - ever.
 
Youre almost right.  Its not that the market believes the iPhone to be technically superior, its that the vast majority of the market doesnt care about technical superiority.
 
The iPhone is sexy, well-marketed, and - the most important part - EASY AND FUN TO USE.  All its technical limitations and compromises were made to make the average user happy.  Apple excels at build quality, style, and user experience, and its why their product share continues to grow at the expense of others.
 
The Sidekick was a great device, and if the original crew were still designing new revisions, it would give the iPhone a run for its money within certain market segments (people who type a lot, tech savvy people). But thats not the reality, sadly, and the iPhone has simply out-competed the Sidekick.
 
posted by Darren
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Oh please. The iPhone kicks the sidekicks ass. Youre delusional.
 
posted by dave
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I used my sidekick every day since it came out and never had to replace it. The thing was indestructible  I repeatedly dropped it down stairs and stepped on it and used it in the rain with no problems.
 
Still works today, although the keyboard is peeling a little. Wonder why everyone else had such a different experience.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
it was obvious [the iPhone] was a knockoff of the Sidekick
 
This is just a completely idiotic statement. No matter how good the Sidekick is (was?).
 
posted by pwb
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
Android, and the G1 in particular, should serve sidekick users well.  It combines most whats good about the IPhone, (strong browser with touchscreen), and the Sidekick, (good keyboard, trackball).  Its definitely not perfect, there are core applications that still need improvement, but they will be improved.
 
posted by mathiastck
 on December 12, 2008 #
 
I second the recommendation for Instapaper - its an addiction-enabler for voracious reading addicts like myself. It does all kinds of cool reformatting, like stripping comments from blog posts and other administrative debris. Plus, as an added bonus, articles are also available on the regular browser version as well, so you can flip back and forth between iphone and desktop reading as needed. I got hooked on the web version before the iphone app, actually.
 
posted by Al Abut
 on December 13, 2008 #
 
The iPhone was much more than evolutionary. Its just hard to see this because the iPhone does what it does so well. I dont think I truly had a grasp of this until I got a chance to try the BlackBerry Storm its only by the comparison that the problems Apple wrestled with and overcome become clearer. For instance, it becomes clear that the physics of scrollable lists (momentum, etc.) wasnt a gratuitous nicety or eye-candy it was important to making the touch interface viable at all.
 
Theres no question the iPhones keyboard is its weakest point, but Jobs must have (correctly) identified a significant target market for which the overall experience, including size savings from not having a keyboard, was more important. Moreover, this decision forced Apple into not relying on the keyboard as a crutch, which likely paid dividends in other parts of the interface (compare the G1 for example, where the keyboard is at times a crutch). That said, I suspect a keyboard-bearing version of the iPhone is closer than most people think.
 
posted by Alan Yeung
 on December 13, 2008 #
 
I had never seen a Sidekick in person, but recognized one in a couple scenes in a movie I watched last night.  I think that the biggest problem with the Sidekick was its enormous size.  The thing looked as big as a Newton, and I suspect that one could make similar arguments about the fact that it did not take the world by storm either.
 
Not quite often makes for a huge chasm to cross in consumer acceptance.
 
posted by Bret
 on December 14, 2008 #
 
Absolutely. When folks asked me if I was buying the iPhone when it first came out, Id always reply Nope, Ive already owned a Sidekick. And then theyd look at me like Id said the most illogical thing ever uttered. I blame T-Mobile and their youth-only marketing. But some people like Marc Cuban saw through it all, even back in 2004  http://weblogs.jupiterresearch.com/analysts/gartenberg/archives/2004/09/mark_cuban_give.html
 
posted by Noah
 on December 15, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November 25, 2008
 
Title: Blogs I Would Like to Read
 
(in no particular order)
 
The Wonk Wing: Thoughtful exploration of important policy issues by decent writers who are clearly fascinated by their subject. Not only would you get a first-class education in the relevant issues around health care, global warming, urban sprawl, zoning, traffic, sewage, etc. but youd have fun while doing it. Think Ezra Klein for more than just health care. Think The Wonk Room but more Sorkin and less Pennebaker. (Sorry, Wonk Room!)
 
Perfect Devices: Coverage of things which are simply the best-in-the-world at what they do, and the stories of how they got there. I want stories from the people who calibrate bathroom-mirror lighting to be the perfect combination of brightness and diffusion so that its diagnostically acute without being brutal (ASFTINDA, 302). I want stories about the kitchen at French Laundry and Alinea. I want the start-to-finish story of HF&J designing a typeface. (Yes, Im eagerly awaiting Objectified.)
 
17th and Pennsylvania: This is the address of the Starbucks outside the White House, where apparently executive branch officials regularly grab coffee, chat, and meet with a wide variety of famous-for-DC types. Why doesnt an enterprising Gawker Stalker simply sit there and write down what happens?
 
This Academic Life: Stories of new papers and research results  not just a summary of the work itself, but the story of how it fits into the fields debates, the personal intrigues of the players, the implications for the wider world. Basically, Lingua Fraca returning as a blog.
 
Evisceration Quarterly: A daily selection of the finest in insults, takedowns, and general argumentative evisceration. The motto: teaching you how to think by showing you how not to. And, to not be entirely negative, the occasional model of clarity. With special blogging consultant, Brad DeLong.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 25, 2008
 
Id like to point out that we actually do have fun at the Wonk Room.
 
posted by Brad Johnson
 on November 26, 2008 #
 
You do read Kevin Kellys Cool Tools, right?
 
posted by Yatima
 on November 26, 2008 #
 
I have long thought that This Academic Life would be a great blog to read. I was quite tempted to try writing it when I was in academia. The problem, though, is that academics can anonymously torpedo each others careers in tenure meetings and grant reviews, so its important to avoid publicly embarrassing other academics  and especially important to avoid embarrassing or irritating your boss  while youre still working in the field as a junior researcher. So science is a very polite field, in the way that, e.g., the world of the Three Musketeers was polite  if you insult someone theyre liable to nail you to the ground with a rapier, so everyone has really good manners.
 
Id like to think that, were I retired and looking for a hobby, I might try writing that blog from outside the field
 
posted by Mike Booth
 on November 29, 2008 #
 
I think it would also be interesting to see a Development Blog that focused just on basic policy construction for the developing world.  For that matter, a local government blog would be really interesting too.  These would help people keep up to date on the most cost-effective infrastructure and policy means, and steer people to well reviewed research.  Taking that together with aggregate statistics from local governments (or developing country governments) would allow for good grading of policy.  Add it to the Wonk Wing.
 
posted by Mr. L
 on November 30, 2008 #
 
These comments totally suck. I expected someone to reply having found each and every one of these awesome blogs.
 
posted by David
 on March 24, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November 22, 2008
 
Title: Obamas Strategy: A Debate
 
A Liberal Shock Doctrine: Our economy is collapsing. Theres a Democratic majority in the House and possibly a supermajority in the Senate. In the last election, both parties campaigned on change and the candidate accused of socialism won, by a solid majority. There will never be another time like now.
 
Obama must take swift action to pass radical change. Fill the cabinet with vocal progressives, push a series of strong progressive bills thru Congress, take full advantage of the first hundred days. Anything else will squander the promise of this election.
 
The Audacity of Patience: If Obama tries to pass his wishlist in the first hundred days, it will blow up in his face. Not because America is a center-right country, but because its a left-wing one. The radical conservatives knew it was unlikely they would hold on to power, so they had to do as much as they could in the time they had. Progressives dont face that deadline; it now seems possible to permanently destroy this incarnation of the Republicans Party.
 
Whats needed is not urgent action, but the slow and careful work of building an enduring majority. That means bringing in Republicans, occupying the rhetorical (if not political) center, and passing incremental steps that lead to lasting change. But most importantly, it means being effective. We dont need partisans, we need people with experience who can get things done. Even moderate bills passed now can ensure Democratic domination for a generation, allowing plenty of opportunity to improve things in the decades to come.
 
Open the Overton Window: This is how it starts. First its the campaign, then  the first hundred days, then the midterms, then reelection, then more midterms, and then the next nominees campaign (who is unlikely to be as talented or progressive as this one). Theres always an excuse to put off the important changes.
 
If youre serious about lasting change, hiring moderates is the wrong way to go. It doesnt attract Republicans; it just sends the message Democrats arent serious. The electorate likes success; if success comes from Democrats, then theyll like Democrats. A progressive cabinet can move the ball forward by having their agencies implement countless small reforms while using their status as public figures to build support for bigger ones. All of which will further cement the Democrats reputation as the party of progress. The country isnt left-wing because it likes people with blue logos and Ds next to their names; its left-wing because it wants shared prosperity and security. If Democrats dont deliver, theyll turn to someone else.
 
Spin Up the Noise Machine: Its not the Cabinets job to push new policy ideas. They cant  their job is to push the Presidents agenda and promote official doctrine. Building support for new ideas is the job of the ideological infrastructure that Democrats have been building over the past eight years: CAP, CAF, TAP, and the rest. Sure, during the Bush Administration they had to spend all their time fighting bad ideas, but with a Democratic president they can start rallying support for good ones.
 
And a President who leads as a consensus figure will be much more effective at passing them. America is sick of fierce partisanship; it longs for a government it can believe in again. A Cabinet of moderates and conservatives will be much more convincing salespeople for progressive proposals than a group of fire-breathing liberals.
 
An American Renewal: Do you seriously believe that? Sure, we can all agree this administration has been a disaster, but once Bush and his cronies recede into the distance, this coalition of moderates and conservatives will fall apart. The factions will start sniping at each other in the press, use their control over staff to advance their own agendas, and just generally try to sabotage the Presidents proposals  and with it, his appearance of effectiveness.
 
This country has been very badly misrun for almost a decade. Shills for industry pervade the regulators, conservative loyalists have burrowed deep into every agency, and public discussion has been pulled so far right that most people dont even remember what a left-wing idea looks like. (As opposed to the purely factual questions the left has been consistently correct about.) Whats needed is a process of serious American renewal. A bunch of DC think-tanks pushing policy papers isnt going to do it; the problems are serious enough that leadership has to come from the top.
 
Blow-Up: Which brings me back to where I started. You cant just spin this country around in an instant; it will take years of hard work. Sure, a coalition of moderates may end up falling apart, but a group of fervent partisans will never get off the ground. Even with the crisis, America just isnt ready for a complete policy reversal. Our best hope is to take them there gradually  passing increasingly ambitious policy, appointing increasingly progressive officials, electing increasingly progressive candidates. There are no quick fixes; thats what well have to do if you really want to win.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 22, 2008
 
I get the sense that the Obama administration will be boldly pragmaticif such a thing is possible.  The focus will be on the economy, for the foreseeable future.  Lets just hope that hes bold enough to prime the pump and get things going.  Though the Great Depression isnt completely analogous to our current situation, I believe its close enough to pay attention to what (eventually) got us out if itMASSIVE deficit spending (approaching 130% GDP).  Im not suggesting that we lead with that kind of a spending plan, but the meager stimulus plans, to date, are not appropriate (or adequate) by any measure.
 
As a student of history, lets hope Obama sees things in a similar light.
 
posted by Brendan
 on November 23, 2008 #
 
Ive had enough of this Obama talk! I dont get it?! Why are so many supposedly smart people, so forgetful? The hype that surrounds Obama sounds very much like the hype that surrounded Tony Blair when he got elected. We know how the latter ended, and I place money Obama wont be any different!
 
http://www.medialens.org/forum/viewtopic.php?p=9947#9947
 
If you SERIOUSLY believe Obama is radically different from the previous US presidents than you have to somehow show proof of it. Faith simply isnt enough, desperately wanting it to be so simply isnt enough, having wild theorys about how he SHOULD do this or that simply isnt enough - you have to do some research, find solid proof to back up your claims. Otherwise youre no less delusional than the neo cons and their well be greeted like liberater, with flower underneath out feets or Cheney and his hes a bad man so he must have WMDs bullshit.
 
http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=0cOJNC2EuJw
 
They say the path to hell is paved with good intention, its worth sparing more than a modicum of throught on this saying.
 
Im not saying Obama will be like the next Hitler, but putting all you hopes into a basket when you dont even know whether itll be capable of holding the weight is simply foolish! Am I the only one who can see this?!
 
posted by N
 on November 24, 2008 #
 
Um, America is a left-wing country?  48% of the popular vote went to Mccain/Palin, and you think you were living in a left-wing country?
 
I guess since you were only 14 when Bush took office, I can understand how you might think things are going to be truly different now.  Prepare to be disappointed.
 
posted by Mark
 on November 24, 2008 #
 
Presidential voting has to be about the worst way to measure popular opinion Ive ever heard. Your number isnt even right  McCain got 46% of the popular vote.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 24, 2008 #
 
All of what you said. Especially, we the public have to push for good ideas as they are proposed (and for original good ideas as well). Right vs. left isnt the issue.
 
Its ineffective to simply dilute good ideas to make them less unacceptable to their enemies. Instead, negotiate the good ideas up front, and push the ones that can have wide support across the spectrum.
 
The key immediate issue is the financial crisis, and Obama seems to be taking the right approach: use the necessary stimulus spending for widely supported good things, like health, education, unemployment benefits when necessary, and critical infrastructure. Money spent this way is much more effective as fiscal stimulus than hundreds of billions poured into the same predatory financial institutions that created the crisis in the first place.
 
Later, we will have to get spending under control. That will be hard because of all the vested interests in unsustainable, ineffectual, dishonest ways. In my field (health care) for example, pharmaceutical, insurance, and Medicare-fraud abuses should be the first sacred cows to go  but not the last.
 
Today you pretty much need to be predatory, contemptuous of the public interest, to get a good job in most corporations, in most fields. This must change, or we will never get our financial house in order.
 
posted by John S. James
 on November 24, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November 19, 2008
 
Title: Inside GE
 
For the past six months or so, Ive been working on getting data out of government in various ways. At one point, I was looking thru SEC files online and noticed that some portions were redacted. I filed a Freedom of Information request for the redacted portion and any documents pertaining to why it was redacted. It ended up costing $28 and to make sure I get the most for my money, I thought Id share the results with you:
 
Confidential Treatment Requested by General Electric Company
 
1. Please refer to comment 5 of our letter dated August 21, 2007. Please provide a more detailed analysis justifying the omission of  disclosure [] that specifically sets fort  the manner in which competitors could use the information to obtain the competitive advantage cited in your response.
 
Response
 
[*** Confidential treatment requested for the paragraphs below:
 
General Electric Companys (GE or the Company) long-term performance awards program (the LTPA) is based on four equally weighted business measurements, which are: (a) average earnings per share growth rate; (b) average revenue growth rate; (c) cumulative return on total capital; and (d) cumulative cash flow from operating activities. As indicated in the Companys response letter, dated October 10, 2007, these business measurements are used to establish financial goals (the Goals) for the Company over a three-year period and are directly derived from the Companys internal, confidential business plan. Each of the Goals involves confidential information that, if made public, [REDACTED] [REDACTED] For example, upon the announcement of a sizable acquisition, debt investors generally examine the companies ability to fund the acquisition and to service its existing debt and [REDACTED] [REDACTED] [REDACTED] will be affected by the acquisition. This point is illustrated by the Companys December 26, 2007 announcement that GE Capital would acquire certain assets and businesses from Merill Lynch Capital. Although immaterial to GE Capital, after the announcement of the acquisition [REDACTED] [REDACTED] [REDACTED] Based on its experience the Company believes that [REDACTED] in the Goals such as [REDACTED] acquisition [REDACTED] like the Merill Lynch Capital acquisition [REDACTED] [REDACTED] The Company believes that disclosing the goals would [REDACTED] [REDACTED] the Goals [REDACTED] [REDACTED] [REDACTED] As a result, the Companys [REDACTED] [REDACTED]
 
[] We do not believe that the SECs executive compensation disclosure rules should cause the disclosure of the Goals simply because the Companys Management Development and Compensation Committee chose to include them in the LTPA. Such disclosure would have the unintended and harmful effect of [REDACTED] [REDACTED]
 
The Company therefore believes that it would suffer substantial competitive harm if ti had to disclose the Goals because it would [REDACTED] [REDACTED]
 
End of request for confidential treatment ***]
 
Hope that helps. At least the SEC uses white-out instead of black marker.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 19, 2008
 
So have you spent enough time in the strange frontier of SEC mining and analysis to observe anything interesting from the content of the FOI response you posted above? It and its context is greek to me.
 
posted by Alex
 on November 19, 2008 #
 
Cant help too much; they blocked out most of the interesting bits.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 19, 2008 #
 
It should in theory be possible to test hypotheses about redactions by measuring the amount of space they take up.  With monospace fonts, all you can know is the number of characters in a redacted word  but with proportional fonts perhaps someone could write some fancy software to provide a list of possible English words for the gaps.
 
posted by pde
 on November 20, 2008 #
 
pde: Its been done. Someone actually recovered a country name in a document that way.
 
The problem is much of this information is very specialized, so while it is valuable to certain people, its just not that valuable enough to justify trying to pry it out.
 
Not all (trade) secrets are newsworthy.
 
I mean, if you had the formula for Coca-Cola, what would you DO with it?
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on November 21, 2008 #
 
Heres my rough guess at what that above is all above:
 
Were talking about buying some companys stuff. If that happens, various executives are going to get a bonus. We dont want to tell you how much of a bonus, because that mean you could figure out how much we intended to pay. And we dont think were required to disclose that.
 
Something along those lines.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on November 21, 2008 #
 
posted by Douglas Knight
 on November 23, 2008 #
 
Do you have any comments on the FOIA process? Does it work as advertised?
 
posted by Douglas Knight
 on November 23, 2008 #
 
I have several articles on the problems with FOIA Im trying to place, but in this one case the process seemed to work OK, although Im not super-happy with the result.
 
posted by Aaron Swaty
 on November 23, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November 18, 2008
 
Title: An Obama Story
 
John Comaroff is a professor of anthropology at the University of Chicago, where Barack Obama used to teach. Obama still lives in the neighborhood, Hyde Park. Recently, on the radio show Open Source, Comaroff told this story:
 
We have a cleaner in our building  70-something-year-old African American guy; sweet, sweet guy. And every evening he comes into our office about six and takes our garbage and stuff.  He didnt come in on Tuesday  I was up late, working until I went to see election results.
 
Of course, Hyde Park was abuzz. Hyde Park thinks of this election as its own. And the fact that the Obama kids were at school on Tuesday and Wednesday, and we all had to ride around the TV cameras to get to our parking, was the kind of masochistic pleasure that were having in Hyde Park, which after all has always been told its the fringe of the nation. Weve always been told that nothing we do or say counts anywhere else, especially not across the border in Indiana. So to suddenly find ourselves at the center of the political process is interesting.
 
So [on Wednesday] the guy comes into my office and I say So, where were you yesterday? Ah, he says, I was in Grant Park [where Obama gave his victory speech]. Grant Park? Yeah, right near the front  I could have touched Barack Obama. How did you get there? Its tough to get tickets.
 
He said You dont understand. A few years back, I worked Law School, I cleaned the Law School. And Obamas office was on my run. He worked late many nights and he was really interested. Id come by cleaning and hed always stop me for a chat. Sometimes hed share food with me  he always brought food in  and the thing was, he sat down and he talked to me. He said Tell me about your community. Tell me whats going on out there. I wanna know. I wanna know whats out there on the streets. I wanna know how America is living.
 
And one got the sense that this guy, alienated from the political process, alienated from the work process, found in Obama a real human being.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 18, 2008
 
I think the emphasis on alienation is interesting Obamas lack of experience and age were always cited as problems, but I saw them as assets: lack of system imbrication is def. a plus if you want to change things.
 
posted by Ryan Hayes
 on November 18, 2008 #
 
@Ryan Hayes:
 
I absolutely agree.
 
Im young (mid-20s) and watched the election with my grandparents.  My grandmother said, after Obamas acceptance speech, Who would have figured, four years ago, that hed make it?
 
I responded that I had, the moment I heard him speak at the convention.
 
She responded that she had too, she just meant she hadnt expected hed make it so soon; she figured hed run in 12, 16, or 20.
 
I said that I was always one of the guys who believed that the sooner he ran, the better, that if he stayed in Washington too long hed end up just like everybody else.  (I think John Kerry is a great example of a politician who was eloquent and inspiring when he got his start and is now much the opposite.)
 
Anyway, its interesting, looking back at all the people who thought Obama couldnt do it this soon, that hed be better poised if he spent a few more years as a Senator.  I always believed he could pull it off if he ran in 08, and its nice being vindicated.
 
posted by Thad
 on November 19, 2008 #
 
I grew up in Soviet Union and now study Soviet culture, and the first thing that this story reminded me of were Soviet childrens stories about Lenin. In the same way that Obama is depicted here Lenin was systematically depicted speaking with the poor people of the land or with soldiers who guarded him.
 
This is not to say that Obama has a similarity with Lenin, but the kind of myth-building employed here definitely does.
 
posted by Nikita
 on November 19, 2008 #
 
Its very nice that Nikita doesnt think the story proves Obama is just like Lenin. I agree; we should totally wait for the elimination of the kulaks to make that comparison.
 
Since Nikita agrees that the comparison is weak, maybe shed prefer to make one to Hitler instead? I mean, isnt that the more traditional approach?
 
Obviously, there will be heartwarming stories about anyone who is able to win votes. And many or all of them will be true; who gets to decide their emergence is myth-building? And indeed, these stories dont necessarily prove much. Still, pointing out that some historical monster was also featured in heartwarming stories is the laziest form of slander.
 
posted by Warren Terra
 on November 19, 2008 #
 
Warren, Nikita is right that the leader cares for the people is a standard trope, and shes right to caution against hero-worship. And the words that Comaroff puts in Obamas mouth  - I wanna know how America is living - are laughable and only explicable as intentional mythologizing.  Isnt it more likely that he said, how are you, how is your family? If he really said, I wanna know whats out there on the streets to an elderly custodian, then christ, hes a jerk.
 
posted by Bloix
 on November 19, 2008 #
 
Thanks for the link.  Great interview.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on November 20, 2008 #
 
Warren, comparing the way Obama has been depicted in this story with the way Lenin used to be depicted I only wished to emphasize the similarity in their image as it is being produced, not in their personalities or political ways. By the way, I didnt have the intention to compare Obama to a common image of a monster, in this case I would have chosen Stalin or, indeed, Hitler instead, because they are more universally considered evil.
 
Bloix, thank you for mentioning the leader cares for the people standard trope - this were the words I was looking for. You are right, during the period depicted in the story he wasnt the big leader yet. For me this story is absolutely plausible and could have happened like that in reality. But there is always an intention in telling a specific story. So, this is non-fictional myth-building. :)
 
By the way, Nikita is a male name - think of Nikita Khrushchev, for example.
 
posted by Nikita
 on November 20, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November 16, 2008
 
Title: Kafka for the Kindergarten Set
 
Just as Bushs Healthy Forests Initiative cut down more trees and his Clean Skies Initiative increased pollution, his No Child Left Behind Act hurt students, especially poor students. That this is a controversial statement shows just how rare genuine child advocates are (compared to, say, environmentalists) in policy debates.
 
NCLB requires every school administer standardized tests to their students. If the scores are bad, they get punished. (This makes as much sense as beating kids who lose races.) And it only gets worse from there. Making high test scores the ultimate goal of education distorts everything along the way, sending schools spiraling own into a Kafkaesque nightmare of bureaucratic child torture.
 

 
The story is told in up-close detail in Linda Perlsteins Tested, a profile of Tyler Heights elementary in Maryland. Its a tale of such thoroughgoing rot that its hard to even know where to begin. But lets start with the tests. Theyre invasive and traumatic. They take time and teachers away from class and scare students (especially since the kids are led to believe they wont graduate if they fail). They test narrow, specific knowledge in dumb ways (What text features made the directions [in this cookie recipe] easy for third graders to follow?). And they make kids feel like failures in situations where teachers are prohibited from helping.
 
The tests are just plain bad. Their questions are invariably annoying and sometimes just plain bizarre (Which word is made up of two words?). Of the handful of examples in the book (which are for 3rd graders), even I get some of them wrong. They assume weird background knowledge (which two presses are the same? dont press me, full-court press, tailor press, press agent, pressing for an answer) and strange vocab (crabapples and cattails) and are just terribly written, full of stilted jargon.
 
But thats just the beginning. Since the tests are so all-important, everything gets pushed around for them. Art and gym are cancelled (although, for contractual reasons, not in the school Perlstein studied) since theyre not tested, as is recess (this despite evidence recess improves test scores!). But even more absurdly, science and social studies are canceled too, since the test questions dont address them.
 
The remaining time is spent teaching to the test. Test language infiltrates everything. The only writing students ever do is sample short-answer sections (What text feature could have been added to help a reader better understand the information?, as opposed to writing your own story). Even the stories kids read are analyzed only in terms of potential test questions.
 
Much of class is filled with pure test-prep: no actual education, just test-taking tricks. Some of it is common stuff  take deep breaths, work until the time is called, eliminate obviously wrong answers  but most of it is specific to the states bizarre test (special rules about how to phrase written answers and which words to use for extra points). The walls are filled with the schools four-point plans for successful responses, e.g. BATS, which stands for borrow from the question, answer the question, use text supports, stretch formula.
 
It only gets worse from there. Apparently even non-stop test prep doesnt raise scores enough, so schools are forced to use evidence-based curricula like Saxon Math and Open Court Reading. These are special packages of textbooks and workbooks and scripts for the teachers which prescribe specifically which stories and text features should be taught in which order and in which way. (Teachers cant deviate from the script, of course, because thats not evidence-based.) The whole system must be purchased for a small fortune from a major textbook company and supervisors occasionally drop in to make sure the books are being used appropriately.
 
Its clear the books dont teach any actual understanding; theyre just teaching kids to memorize the answers to various test prep questions. When asked a question, the students just cycle through random combinations of test buzzwords until they hit upon the right answer. Since they never get to read for fun, or even read for anything other than dissecting text features, they presumably learn to hate reading too.
 
But the stilted curricula is just the beginning of the scammers. In their desperation to raise scores up, schools are open to predation by a whole suite of consultants and teams who promise to have the winning secret to raising test scores. (One of the books most poignant scenes comes at an educational conference, when one such scam artist takes credit for the profiled schools test score rise.) And so the teachers are forced to do absurd things like write the state educational guidelines they plan to fulfill that day on the board, assign practice tests weekly, have their teaching evaluated by non-educators who observe them for fifteen minutes, and hold school assemblies on test prep featuring men in furry blue muppet costumes.
 
Together, its a frightening picture: no recess, no science, no social studies, no leaving your chair or working in groups, just sitting in your seat, listening to scripts and test-prep advice, before worrying youre about fail school because you have no idea what theyre saying. This is what they mean when they say No Child Left Behind.
 
Every year, a couple months before school ends, a kind of controlled experiment happens in NCLB schools: The principal remains the same, the teachers remain the same, the students remain the same. The only thing that changes is that the test is over, forgotten until next year starts. And suddenly everything changes: test prep boards come off the wall, students start writing poetry, they go on field trips and do science experiments, they work in groups and do real reading.
 
I challenge anyone to watch both schools and insist that the first is better for our kids. I dont think you could do it. So, of course, nobody watches. Decisions on these laws are made far away, in DC, by folks whose only experience of public school comes from staged photo ops.
 
Everyone loves to critique No Child Left Behind. Democrats say it isnt fully funded, Republicans say it interferes too much with local control of schools. But this is just tinkering around the edges  nobody disagrees with the fundamental premise. After all, what politician can be against accountability?
 
The only question left is: who will hold them accountable?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 16, 2008
 
That is an terrific book cover design.
 
Saxon Math is a procedure for making students hate math. Each day (in their algebra texts) they present an algorithm for solving a particular form of equation. No attempt is made to foster understanding; facts such as the laws of logarithms, whose truth can easily be demonstrated, are left to be memorized with no explanation. The result is students who cant solve math problems, dont understand any mathematical concepts, and wont take any math in college because they think they hate it.
 
Fortunately, even brief exposure to decent mathematics education can remedy this.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on November 16, 2008 #
 
Apart from the obvious explanation, regarding the predatory capitalist tendencies of the bottom feeders and low life bureaucrats exploiting this new industry of testing and instruction, a possible reason for some of these excesses, is the idea of a stress affective dopamine economy which has the entire Western world locked in a strange addictive behavior dance to maintain a certain level of socially generated stress. Very Kafa-esque, indeed.
 
see: http://maetl.coretxt.net.nz/the-stress-addiction-loop
 
While I sense a mild but vaguely nauseating libertarian hyperbole, the Little Manchurian Candidates story that I linked to is a good explanation of immense psychological destruction that the American school system wreaks on young minds: http://www.rense.com/general69/little.htm
 
The most significant thing I think, is that by smashing children with mediocrity from an early age, they are discouraged from becoming self motivated learners and developing analytical and critical interpretation skills, which basically means they either develop a hate for the tedium and boredom of reading or treat the written word as gospel without question. The ones who are mentally and creatively incapable of submitting to this regime are subsequently branded disruptive and smashed with meds until they learn not to try and battle the stress economy.
 
posted by maetl
 on November 17, 2008 #
 
I always find it humerus that Bush is blamed for NCLB when it was  co-Authored by Representatives John Boehner (R-OH) and George Miller (D-CA) and Senators Judd Gregg (R-NH) and Edward Kennedy (D-MA).  The bill was signed by Bush and I guess you could make the argument that it was underfunded by Bush, but the framework and purpose of the legislation and ultimately the outcome of this legislation should not be placed solely on Bush.
 
posted by Kevin Hasslinger
 on November 20, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November 15, 2008
 
Title: The Credibility Gap
 
It was, you may recall, a truism of the campaign that Barack Obama did not have the experience to lead, while Hillary Clinton and John McCain clearly did. This was a difficult point to argue against politically  voters knew that John McCain and Hillary Clinton had been in government and on TV for many years and looked old and respected, while Barack Obama looked young and new. And yet, the exact opposite was true: Barack Obama was the only one of the three who was a competent leader.
 
This was seen, foremost, in the management of their campaigns. Hillary Clintons campaign consisted of friends and loyalists, each with poorly-defined job titles, who took every opportunity to attack their coworkers for their own benefit. (It was a terribly unpleasant place to work, explained a Clinton staffer. You had seven people on a morning call, all of whom had tried to get someone else on the call fired, or knew someone on the call tried to get them fired. It was not a recipe for cohesive team building.)
 
Spending was out of control, the campaign lurched from message to message, and her senior advisors were woefully ill-advised. (Top campaign strategist Mark Penn, who didnt even quit his day job as CEO of the most notorious corporate public relations and unionbusting firm, didnt even know that states awarded delegates proportionally.) Bill kept interfering, backchanneling with staffers and giving speeches without clearance, while Hillary got angry and threw fits.
 
This shouldnt have been a surprise. As far back as 2004, Brad DeLong was trying to talk people out of supporting Hillary for President, based on her total failure at health care reform in 1993/4. His explanation is worth quoting at length:
 
[W]hen senior members of the economic team said that key senators like Daniel Patrick Moynihan would have this-and-that objection, she told them they were disloyal. When junior members of the economic team told her that the Congressional Budget Office would say such-and-such, she told them (wrongly) that her conversations with CBO head Robert Reischauer had already fixed that. When long-time senior hill staffers told her that she was making a dreadful mistake by fighting with rather than reaching out to John Breaux and Jim Cooper, she told them that they did not understand the wave of popular political support the bill would generate. And when substantive objections were raised to the plan by analysts calculating the moral hazard and adverse selection pressures it would put on the nations health-care system
 
Hillary fans later tried to assure him that she had change, but this campaign seems to have borne out his original estimation.
 
John McCains campaign consisted of extremists pulled from Bushs entourage and beyond, who pressured the candidate into compromising his instincts, policies, and principles. Used to running small, personal insurgent campaigns, he let his Bush-backed campaign advisors spend money on huge offices and ad buys meant to convey a sense of inevitability. (It didnt work  the Bush base never contributed the money needed to pay for it all and it was largely scrapped when the campaign went bankrupt.)
 
His policy advisors came not just from the Bush team, but from the gamma quadrant. When McCain slipped up and said he wouldnt meet with Latin American dictators like the President of Spain, McCains foreign policy advisor insisted this wasnt a gaffe  that McCain wasnt planning to meet with the man who pulled his troops out of Iraq. On health care, the centerpiece of their plan was to raise the price of insurance so that people wouldnt buy so much. On the economy  well, on the economy McCain seemed to announce a new plan every day. He canceled his campaign and flew to Washington to demand a meeting with the President on the bailout bill, but when, in the meeting, he was asked what his position was, he stormed out of the room. When the bill came to the floor, he took credit for putting it together. When it failed, he took credit for making sure it didnt pass. When a modified version passed, he took credit for that too. And in the debates, he seemed to announce new programs off-the-cuff, like one plan to have the government buy up all bad mortgages directly.
 
His management was similarly erratic. He liked to call staffers directly with ideas, in a subversive attempt to overthrow his own chain of command. He liked running his mouth off to the press and had to be restrained by his own staffers. Indeed, his whole campaign seemed like a struggle between two aspects of his personality. One knew what he had to do to win and put structures in place to do it, the other wasnt so big on winning and tried to subvert those same structures.
 
When a spokesperson, Jill Hazelbaker, called Obamas trip overseas a campaign rally and one giant photo opportunity, McCain told the press he disagreed and would speak to her about it. Upset, Hazelbaker refused to come into work or return McCains phone calls. His campaign manager told him he had to apologize to his spokesperson. Isnt it supposed to work the other way around? Then again, it does kind of explain why McCain addressed a group of supporters as my fellow prisoners.
 
Barack Obama was a serious contrast. He picked the most experienced and talented staffers from the past Democratic campaigns. With a deft understanding of how to manage large, volunteer organizations from his days as a community organizer, he gave them clear roles and managed them effectively. With millions of volunteers around the country, he built what was probably one of the largest organizations in the country, and the whole thing went off like clockwork, with everyone having clear, achievable goals and being held accountable for meeting them  despite the vast majority of them being unpaid volunteers!
 
When it came to policy, he put together advisory teams on each topic that contained leading experts from a variety of perspectives and tried to synthesize a coherent and centrist policy from each of them. The results were not perfect, but they were far more detailed and thoughtful than anyone expected from a Presidential candidate and tend to impress policy experts. (Compare this to their usual reaction to campaign material which is to hide their eyes and insist well, (s)he really doesnt mean it.)
 
His team had a strategy and message and, for the most part, stuck with it, despite the usual fluctuations and setbacks. People werent capriciously fired (with the exception of foreign policy advisor Samantha Powers, who was axed for calling Hillary a monster) or reshuffled. They did their jobs and they did them well. No drama Obama was the slogan and they carried it out  no big changes or fights or leaks.
 
His transition has shown a similar preparedness and focus. He immediately assembled a council of varied and respected advisors on the financial crisis and later other topics. (Although at times the teams membership criteria can be puzzling.) One member of his team talks to the public (through Sunday show interviews and YouTube videos), while a website keeps everyone up-to-date. His staff does a thorough review of each candidates background and each agencys operations. His team is even reviewing every Bush executive order to see which ones need to be overturned.
 
No doubt he will be a similar president: a competent manager, surrounded by effective and experienced people, all trying to do good things without fuss. The only remaining questions  remaining, clearly, because the answers havent been decided yet  are who those people will be and what good things they will carry out.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 15, 2008
 
The only thing I would like to see would be sources for your info, as Ive not heard some of it stated before.
 
posted by JohnO
 on November 17, 2008 #
 
JohnO: most of the information about the campaigns that Aaron mentiones can be found in a set of 7 eye-opening articles at Newsweek:
 
http://www.newsweek.com/id/167581
 
posted by Anonym
 on November 17, 2008 #
 
Quick note: the usual translation for Presidente del Gobierno is Prime Minister, not President.
 
posted by Keith Gaughan
 on November 17, 2008 #
 
Though Im a big fan of hers, I dont think the firing of Samantha Power can be called capricious; I didnt approve of it, but I can certainly understand Obamas desire to cut off any unnecessary PR backlash as soon as possible, and prove that he runs a tight ship.  Dont be too surprised if you see Power come back into an Obama administration: shes been one of his longest advisors, and is still one of his trusted friends, as far as I can tell from outside.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on November 18, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: November 15, 2008
 
Title: OCLC on the Run
 
OCLC is running scared. My comments on their attempt to monopolize library records has been Slashdotted, our petition has received hundreds of signatures, and theyre starting to feel the heat.
 
At a talk I gave this morning to area librarians, an OCLC rep stood up and attempted to assure the crowd that what I was saying wasnt entirely true. What wasnt true? I asked. Id love to correct things. She declined to say, insisting she didnt want to get into an argument.
 
This evening, OCLCs Vice President for WorldCat and Metadata, provides more details. In a blog comment (which, I understand, was sent to OCLC members), she tries to downplay the issue, continuing the OCLC trend of doublespeak about this serious change.
 
She tries to claim were on the same side (We are likely in solid agreement) and insists they are just updating the principles  which have been in place since 1987 and absurdly claiming that the new rules are just a clarification.  (This is just one of a number of black-is-white falsehoods in her post.)
 
But never once does she defend the actual changes. And theyre right there in black-and-white: the records arent allowed to be used in anything that substantially replicates the function, purpose, and/or size of WorldCat. Im not sure how much clearer they can get; these new rules prohibit anyone from building anything that gets anywhere close to WorldCat.
 
My fundamental point stands: As servers have gotten cheaper, its become easy to do for free the things OCLC charges such outrageous amounts for. But OCLC cant have that  theyd have to give up their huge office complex and high salaries (Ms. Calhoun was recently hired away from academia, so her salary isnt available yet, but her fellow VPs make around $300,000/year). So theyre trying to stamp out the competition.
 
Karen insists that OCLC welcomes collaboration with Open Library, which seems a funny way of putting it. As I said last time, theyve played hardball: trying to cut off our funding, hurt our reputation, and pressured libraries not to cooperate. When we tried to make a deal with them, they dragged their feet for months, pretended to come to terms, and then had their lawyers send us an agreement to sign that would require we take all OCLC-related records off our site.
 
Karen, if you really want to increas[e] information access to users around the globe, like you say, heres an easy first step: put the 2 million WorldCat web pages you shared with Google and Yahoo up for download on your website. Its only a small portion of your catalog and youve already shared it with others. Until you take even a baby step like that, its hard to take your protestations of good intent seriously.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 15, 2008
 
I worked with the VP before and she left the place in a total mess. Ask her about Endeavor sometime.
 
Chip Nigles made the deals with Google and Yahoo; no money came back to the membership for the records they created.
 
Keep fighting, Aaron.
 
OCLC is to libraries as Microsoft is to ______.
 
posted by anon
 on November 15, 2008 #
 
Aaron, can you please link  OCLC welcomes collaboration with Open Library to Karens comment? It is hard to understand the context without that.
 
posted by Anand Chitipothu
 on November 15, 2008 #
 
Great post.  More detail would be welcome; or a series of longer essays with the context of the history of OCLC, which is indeed delightful.  It is important to note that when they highlight their past it isnt simply to gloss over what is going on now  that is the ethos that has permated the membership, and it is the strongest point of leverage for dealing with them now (stronger than shaming them publicly).
 
One typo in this post: pressure > pressured in the penultimate para.
 
posted by SJ
 on November 15, 2008 #
 
I saw this bruhaha coming a long time ago (well, relativly; in library years its short, almost a ping, but in internet years its aaaaages) and Im sad and angry to see it come. The library world is at a crossroads, created by OCLCs need to change.
 
Their argument will always be that theyre a member organisation. Now that many, many of their members express concern for this development, will they listen? Maybe those members should look for alternatives that actually benefits us all? The library world is already in peril - risking being irrelevant to the world - and we dont need this nonsense. We need to be more open and cooperative, not less. I think people underestimate the implication here where OCLC is acting like any other money-based business out there; the customers are free to choose whats right for them.
 
Aaron, Im in. What can I do to help out?
 
posted by Alexander Johannesen
 on November 16, 2008 #
 
I work for a library services worker cooperative.  This move by OCLC should provoke members to reassert control of their cooperative.  In the meantime, like the poster above: Im in. What can I do to help out?
 
posted by MJ Ray
 on November 19, 2008 #
 
Aaron I dont think you accurately reflected the exchange when mentioning this statement from the NELINET forum:
 
At a talk I [Aaron] gave this morning to area librarians, an OCLC rep stood up and attempted to assure the crowd that what I was saying wasnt entirely true. What wasnt true? I asked. Id love to correct things. She declined to say, insisting she didnt want to get into an argument.
 
Although the OCLC Rep did indicate she didnt want to get into a protracted discussion with you (admitting that she wasnt the correct OCLC person to do so) she did make clear that your statement about an OCLC requirement to include a field (996) referencing the OCLC record use policy in all records was not true this requirement was removed in revisions well before your statement to the contrary.
 
She also made clear that you are just assuming that OCLC doesnt like what Open Library and others are doing/would like to do as OCLC has indicated, time and time again, fill out the form and ask for permission if you think you might be in violation of the policy OCLC may be perfectly willing to approve your intended use and sign a separate agreement.
 
I know it might be more fun to castigate OCLC for what you think they might say, rather than find out whether you actually have anything to complain about, but the collegial thing to do is to fill out the form, explain the usage as you intend, and see what they say.  You may be pleasantly surprised at the outcome, or you may discover that you do have something to complain about, but I dont think its fair to complain until youve discovered that.
 
posted by Anon
 on November 19, 2008 #
 
Anon, I never said it was required. Both in my talk and in my blog I said they were requesting it, which is true (the request is in the FAQ, for example).
 
Weve asked OCLC for permission, time and time again, as I noted in this very post:
 
When we tried to make a deal with them, they dragged their feet for months, pretended to come to terms, and then had their lawyers send us an agreement to sign that would require we take all OCLC-related records off our site.
 
I was surprised, but not pleasantly.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 19, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

======================================================================================
Date: July 21, 2008
 
Title: The Percentage Fallacy
 
Theres one bit of irrationality that seems like it ought to be in behavioral economics introduction but mysteriously isnt. For lack of a better term, lets call it the percentage fallacy. The idea is simple:
 
One day I find I need a blender. I see a particularly nice one at the store for $40, so I purchase it and head home. But on the way home, I see the exact same blender on sale at a different store for $20. Now I feel ripped off, so I drive back to the first store, return the blender, drive back to the second store, and buy it for $20.
 
The next day I find I need a laptop. I see a particularly nice one at the store for $2500, so I purchase it and head home. But on the way home, I see the exact same laptop for $2480. Pff, well, its only $20, I say, and continue home with the original laptop.
 
Im sure all of you have done something similar  maybe the issue wasnt having to return something, but spending more time looking for a cheaper model, or fiddling with coupons and rebates, or buying something of inferior quality. But the basic point is consistent: well do things to save 50% that wed never do to save 1%.
 
At first this almost seems rational  of course were going to do more to save more money! But you arent saving more money. With both the blender and the laptop, you have the chance to save $20. Either way, youre going to have another twenty in your pocket, which you can spend on exactly the same things later on. Yet we behave differently depending on whether we got that twenty by skimping on a small purchase or skimping on a big one. Rationally, if driving back to the store isnt worth $20 when youre buying a laptop, it isnt worth $20 when youre buying a blender.
 
On the other hand, dont those small savings tend to add up after a while? If you start blowing $20 every time you buy a trinket, youre soon going to be out of disposable income. Meanwhile, spending several thousand dollars is much rarer, so isnt it OK to slack off a bit on such occasions?
 
If we work to save 50% on everything, big or small, thats the equivalent of saving 50% of our money altogether. Whereas if we only try to save fixed amounts on every purchase, how much we save is dependent on how many things we buy.
 
So which is the real irrationality? Im not entirely sure of the answer.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 21, 2008
 
Just wanted to say this reminds me of Why Smart People Make Big Money Mistakes And How To Correct Them by Belsky & Gilovich. It was an entertaining read.
 
posted by Stan
 on July 21, 2008 #
 
This is, or is related to, scope insensitivity:
 
http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/05/scope_insensiti.html
 
posted by Aaron
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
This is covered in behavioural economics. For example, see Predictably Irrational (http://www.amazon.com/gp/reader/006135323X/ or http://openlibrary.org/b/OL9952510M) where Dan Ariely calls it the problem of relativity using an example about pens and suits (p. 19-20).
 
posted by Alex
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
Im not sure that the kind of person who will spend $2500 on a laptop is the same as the kind of person who would return the $40 blender.
 
Im sure there are other analogies which point out this behavior, but I dont think the blender one is realistic.
 
posted by Anthony
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
Isnt there another angle to this? Assuming that the market rate should fairly be the point of best compromise between the lowest a seller will accept and the highest a buyer is prepared to spend, its perceived as important not to support someone charging 200% of the market rate, but significantly less important that someone charging less than 1% above the market rate gets away with it. How dare they charge me $40 for a $20 blender? bears no real comparison to So they charged me $2500 for a $2480 laptop? Wooo. Again, if its a question of principle then the response in one sense should be the same - thats unfair, Im going to sort it out - but this way round, the percentage does seem to matter, whether its $20 or $2000.
 
posted by Igor Clark
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
I think the driving force is the need to not look/feel like an idiot. Buying something at twice the normal price leaves people with the same amount of feeling ripped off, almost regardless of the amount of money that they lost.
 
It then varies how much emphasis people put on not looking like fools vs. saving actual money.  Those whore poor probably think more about the dollars.
 
posted by Mr
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
Maybe people dont return the laptop because buying or returning a laptop usually involves a bit more paperwork/time, since it is a big ticket item.  Also, if you accidentally drop the blender on the way into the store, youre out $40, while if you drop the laptop, youre out $2500.
 
posted by Aaron
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
I personally when doing financial computation put everything into dollars/year. In the above example, both would appear as $20, and I would act accordingly. The reasons for the year, is for comparing reoccurring bills such as cell phones. Add all the costs up, then divide it by the terms of the contract. This way, Im always comparing in like terms.
 
posted by Shawn
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
You might also consider the long term.  A 1% variation of prices between stores is to be expect, but a 50% variation is not, regardless of the price of the item.  One cant put a dollar amount on the variation of prices between goods at different stores for any arbitrary goods; if blenders vary by $20 in price in a town, its unreasonable to expect laptops or cars to vary by the same amount.
 
So if you think in macroscopic terms, we would like a strategy to execute consistently over our lifetimes, for all goods.  If we hit 5 stores on the way home, we cant keep exchanging the item every time we see a 1% variation in the price of a good.  A 50% variation, since its so uncommon, would be worth the effort, since its unlikely to be repeated.
 
I agree with your reasoning in general, Im just thinking of a possible explanation for why people behave this way.
 
posted by enginerd
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
If youre not broke, who really gives a crap?
 
posted by surebutt
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
Did you know that 40% of people are good at understanding percentages, but 70% are bad at it?
 
posted by MathGuy
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
This post reminds me of the book Predictably Irrational by Dan Ariely. Its pop economics but a very good read for intellectuals alike.
 
posted by Ron
 on July 25, 2008 #
 
posted by 
 on July 26, 2008 #
 
There are hidden qualities to the place you purchase an item.  For instance, people typically find (or at least imagine) that higher-priced stores give better service, are more trustworthy, etc.  A higher quality store might be worth 10% of the purchase price.  So, if you spend $22 vs $20 on the blender, you can at least imagine its a wash.  But 100% markup is more than you can ignore.  So then you decide if the effort is worth $20.  For a laptop you might need $2750 vs $2500 before you consider whether the effort is worth the money.
 
Of course there isnt a specific cutoff, so its a bit more vague than this.  And of course higher prices dont always mean a better quality (where quality is customer service, the chance of fraud, the ability to return the item in the future, etc).
 
posted by Ian Bicking
 on July 27, 2008 #
 
Isnt the rational thing to do to judge how long it takes to return the item against the value of your time (judged by the next-best alternative), and if you come out ahead, then to do it, regardless of percentages?
 
I try to think this way, but its hard to fight that feeling of being ripped off when you see a large percentage difference.
 
I also think that when you make a high value purchase, youre in a different thinking mode.
When Im purchasing things in the sub $50 range, Im thinking in terms of how many coffees or books Im giving up. When Im purchasing things in the 1000+ plus range, Im thinking in terms of computers or cars.
 
$20 in the first sense feels like two weeks worth of coffee. $20 in the second sense feels like just some nominal percent of a laptop, so it holds less value until I change purchasing modes.
 
posted by Tim Showers
 on August  6, 2008 #
 
Umm Late to the party here, but I dont get it. If we assume one buys $40 items every week, but buys $2,500 items only once or twice a year, its pretty obvious why it would be a bad idea to get into the habit of letting oneself get ripped off $20 on a $40 item - youll go broke in a hurry.
 
An analogy: Most people will splurge on (dinner, tickets) when on vacation, but not when not. Why? Because their budgets can tolerate a small deviation. But if they begin out-of-budget splurging every week of the year, their budgets will crumble.
 
Its not a fallacy at all. Its about forming good habits. Its a good habit to demand a refund on a 50% overpayment, and probably a bad habit to start haggling over 1% differences.
 
posted by Percy
 on August 19, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June 30, 2008
 
Title: Capital and its Complements: A Summary
 
The following is a non-technical summary of Brad DeLongs May 2008 paper Capital and Its Complements.
 
Adam Smith explained that in all countries with security of property and tolerable administration of justice citizens would spend all their money (capital), either on consumption or investment, causing the countrys economy to grow. After some contention, later economic studies tended to bare this out: a shortage of capital wasnt always the bottleneck, but when it was, removing it could lead to extraordinarily rapid growth.
 
The problem for poor countries is that, because of high mortality rates (which require more children to have some survive) and low educational levels (which mean those children can find productive employment quickly), they have high population growth and thus low capital-to-labor ratios. Worse, trade allows you to spend your money buying manufactured goods from overseas, for which you have only your very cheap labor to provide in return. The result is that it requires an enormous amount of domestic investment to improve capital-to-labor ratios.
 
And so rich country economists made the neoliberal bet on behalf of poor countries: they hoped that loosening restrictions on international capital flows would send capital rushing in to poor countries and build their economies, the same way that Great Britains massive investment in a young United States (in 1913 Britains foreign assets equaled 60% of its domestic capital stock) built up that country.
 
But what ended up happening was exactly the opposite. Yes, NAFTA led US companies to invest the $20 to $30 billion a year on manufacturing in Mexico that its boosters predicted, but that investment was more than outweighed by the $30 to $40 billion a year fleeing the country from Mexicos wealthy wanting to invest it in the United States. Why? In part because the US was more politically stable, and thus a safer investment climate. And in part because the US treats its own workers so poorly  with productivity rising 35% since 2000 while real wages remain flat  it provides an excellent investment opportunity.
 
But meanwhile, all this investment in the US was dwarfed by the Chinese acquisition of our debt (and thus the political risk it represents). China needed to do this, since US purchase of their exports is the only thing funding the manufacturing-led industrialization of a massive portion of their economy; there would be massive dislocation if that funding dried up.
 
Recognition of these facts came slowly. First, Larry Summers said it was our unsustainable current account deficit. (That was the 1990s; today that deficit is four times as large.) Later, economists thought it must have been our large budget deficits. Then they began thinking it was the run-up in housing prices. But that, it is now clear to most economists, was the result of a bubble. And yet the flow of capital to the US continues. But, perhaps even more frighteningly, it could stop at any moment.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 30, 2008
 
ncv0ZD  erdphcoxrkgn, [url=http://vtrgqmwzzcdr.com/]vtrgqmwzzcdr[/url], [link=http://hdrdtjtisjaw.com/]hdrdtjtisjaw[/link], http://xsfumzwejteq.com/
 
posted by zizybgb
 on July  7, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June 19, 2008
 
Title: Last Goodbyes
 
Its minutes to midnight and Im hurriedly packing. Early tomorrow morning I catch a flight to Boston and start my new life. I havent really gotten much of a chance to pack until now, because Ive spent the past few days in a rush of meetings, getting in my last goodbyes for everyone I know in San Francisco.
 
Its been great seeing everyone, but like most locals, theyre all puzzled as to why Im leaving. Ive been struggling to explain why. When I say the weather, everyone just laughs. When I say San Francisco is too loud, they start arguing. When I say its the people, they tell me to find a better group of friends.
 
And the thing is, theyre right. Its none of these. Ive been spectacularly unable to articulate it, but the real answer is simpler and more prosaic. And now, after great thought and struggle, I realize the answer is simply this: Cambridge is the only place thats ever felt like home. Its that simple. And when you put it that way, its clear why I have to go.
 
So goodbye Stanford, goodbye Palo Alto; goodbye south bay, goodbye peninsula; goodbye Change Congress, goodbye Creative Commons; goodbye Mission, goodbye SOMA; goodbye friends, goodbye loved ones; goodbye San Francisco, home to everyone Ive ever loved. Youll always have my heart.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 19, 2008
 
Bye, Aaron.  I feel the same way about New Mexico, sigh.
 
posted by joe
 on June 19, 2008 #
 
That, my friend, is an un-arguable point. Home is home. And whatever and wherever you feel it, enjoy it. Well miss youbut undoubtedly throw an internet tether around you now and again.
 
Cheers and safe travels!
 
posted by Japhet
 on June 19, 2008 #
 
While one cant argue with your feelings, I still think moving from sunny San Francisco to miserable-weather Cambridge, is crazy. You cant go home again, as home is a moment in time.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on June 20, 2008 #
 
its understandable. for all the back and forth on the merits of this place and that, it was when you told me that it felt like home i stopped arguing. well, about what you should do, anyway.
 
posted by q
 on June 22, 2008 #
 
Welcome back. Im glad to hear you had such a positive experience here.  Hope you you keep that warm fuzzy feeling as you settle down, reconnect with the scene, develop a strong local network, and realize what a bunch of a-holes we are.  (BTW, my one-word response to complaints about New England weather: Iowa.)
 
posted by sierra
 on July  3, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June 19, 2008
 
Title: Scenes
 
God, Im so sick of this stuff. Cant we just go home? she wines. Jesus, I say, would it kill you to go one more place? Its been a long hot day in strange, busy New York City, and were not exactly at our best. In fact, the combination of heat and exhaustion has turned our love bitter, brought on the darkness and recriminations. Its at moments like these, the dark depths of a relationship, that you wonder how things could ever work. As we walk down the steps we hear a subway car approach. We accelerate, running to catch it. Its doors open. Were moving faster now, pushing our way through the bustle of Manhattanites to make it. The bell sounds and I jump inside and hear the doors whoosh closed behind me. I spin around only to see her trapped on the other side of the glass. I put my hand up to it, but the train accelerates and shes left standing there, just another face in the crowd.
 
Hey, want to see the game? Want a ticket to the Giants game? I do not, in fact, want to see the game  this or any other game. I hate sports. Yet the scalpers, apparently unaware of this, insist on trying to sell me one. Thats what I get for walking near the ballpark, I guess. As I curse my choice of scenery, a cop pulls up. He lowers his window and leans out toward the scalper. The scalper hands him a ticket and the cop speeds off. But he didnt pay! a man in a suit walking by complains. Cops get a special deal, explain the scalper. The man in the suit laughs and marvels at the scene.
 
Its weird being back at Stanford in the summer. Everythings so empty, nobodys around. Well, not nobody  there seems to be some action near the main quad. There are drum kits spread around and golf carts and purple uniforms lying about. But most of all, there are people  a bunch of students just standing around awkwardly. Im about to ask one of them whats going on when a bell rings and a voice shouts Background! Suddenly all the students snap to attention, begin walking in perfect lines with bookbags slung over their shoulder, bicycles ridden in perfect formation. These arent students at all, I realize with a lurch  theyre extras. Its disconcerting. A police guard is at the side, keeping kids from running over the camera crew. I ask her what theyre filming. Disneys High School Musical, she says quickly, trying to keep a student from cycling over the directors cart.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 19, 2008
 
Wow, I like the format. If a short story is like video, these are like photographs. Well done.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on June 19, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June 16, 2008
 
Title: Moving On
 
In November 2006, I moved to San Francisco because I had to: my company got acquired and us moving out was a condition of the agreement. It was the first time Id ever actually lived in San Francisco, as opposed to just visiting, and I quickly realized that although it was a fun place to visit, I couldnt stand living here.
 
Even after all this time, I cant really put my finger on what it is I dont like  in fact, I suspect its probably harder for me now to explain it than it was when I first came here. The first thing that comes to mind is how loud the city is. I want a place where I can live quietly and focus on my work; but San Francisco is filled with distractions. There are always crews tearing up the street, trains that are delayed, buses that have broken down, homeless people begging, friends having parties, and so on. Its impossible to concentrate and without my concentration, I feel less like me.
 
The other big problem is that San Francisco is fairly shallow. When I go to coffee shops or restaurants I cant avoid people talking about load balancers or databases. The conversations are boring and obsessed with technical trivia, or worse, business antics. I dont see people reading books  even at the library, all the people are in line for the computer terminals or the DVD rack  and people at parties seem uninterested in intellectual conversation.
 
And so Im moving back to Cambridge, Massachusetts  Harvard Square in particular, the one place Ive ever been to that brings a special delight to my eyes, that warms my heart just to see. Surrounded by Harvard and MIT and Tufts and BC and BU and on and on its a city of thinking and of books, of quiet contemplation and peaceful concentration. And it has actual weather, with real snow and seasons and everything, not this time-stands-still sun that San Francisco insists upon.
 
I miss Boston; Im excited to go back.
 
But Im also sad to leave my responsibilities in San Francisco. One of which Id particularly like your help with. Ive been honored and overjoyed to help Lawrence Lessig get his Change Congress project off the ground. If you havent heard, hes trying to build a national movement to get the corruption out of Congress; to pass public financing of public elections, earmark reform, and other pressing concerns.
 
But they need a full-time day-to-day tech organizer. Someone who knows how to blog and who the bloggers are and can keep them in touch with the community. Someone who knows enough about technology to know the tools that can be built and should be. And someone with enough drive and talent to make sure those things get built. Its a dreamy job and I hope theres someone out there who will take it from me. A more formal write-up is on the Change Congress blog.
 
Thanks for everything.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 16, 2008
 
Congrats on your move. I was just in Harvard Square a few days ago and enjoyed my short time walking around the area.
 
I will say, though, that while I was there, my ride on the T was delayed, some street musicians were playing loud Bob Dylan covers and, yes, I even witnessed some homeless people begging. I guess some things about city life are the same wherever you go.
 
posted by Adrian Holovaty
 on June 16, 2008 #
 
Aaronno offense, but lighten up, man! Cities everywhere, even Cambridge, are loud and annoying and have beggars; people will always, even in Cambridge, disappoint and be lower-brow than you wish. I find aspects of San Francisco a bit tedious myself, but your analysis is superficial. Holing yourself up in an academic cocoon is just as selfish and self-enthralled as the database load balancers you mock. Cant you see the contradiction in your engagement through Change Congress and your, frankly, whiny rejectionism? And in your yearning for the real seasons of Boston while at the same time seeking some notion urban purity?
 
posted by Paul Smith
 on June 16, 2008 #
 
In my defense, my sense of San Franciscos annoyances may be slightly skewed by the fact that I presently have A FRIGGIN JACKHAMMER OUTSIDE MY WINDOW THAT WILL NOT STOP GORRAMIT.
 
Sorry, just had to get that off my chest.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on June 16, 2008 #
 
You & I established within 5 minutes of meeting that we have opposite city preferences. You were interested in Philly and I hated every minute there, and I even hated the parts that you liked. Im happily in SF, and you were not so.
 
I am pretty sure, in retrospect, that my problem with Philly was that I didnt figure it out. That is not to say that I should have stayed in Philly & figured it out. If I had, I may have loved it there. But leaving was a much quicker route to the things I wanted.
 
I think I am trying to say Yes, dot-commers can be irritating, but please dont insult my city.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on June 16, 2008 #
 
Interesting post, Aaron. Ive lived in both places, San Francisco now for almost 5 years, and Cambridge (in various places around Harvard Square) for several years previously. I do miss Cambridge a little bitand can relate to your experiences in both places. That being said, though, I do have some thoughts
 
I think that you can surround yourself with the things you like to be around wherever you live-well, at least specifically in these two places. It can more or less difficult in some areas, but it can be done. Its taken me a long time to find my niche in SF- people I can relate to, and friends-rather than acquaintances. I think I fell into the trap of passively looking for the things I craved, instead of proactively finding them & taking a leap of faith every now and then.
 
I think SF is full of a lot of people that are searching for this niche, in fact, I think thats part of the attraction-you can find whatever youre looking for here. But, it can sometimes take some time. Its not a college town, like Cambridge/Boston-its a post college playpen.
 
And-no comment on the weather.
 
posted by Scot Federman
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
Yay!  We will be glad to have you back!  And while I have never been to SF, my wife has and, much to her consternation, found she greatly disliked it, and for much the same reasons you stated.
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
Welcome back to Cambridge. I definitely understand the contrast between San Francisco and Cambridge; I find it really hard to explain to my fellow students that I actually enjoy New England and that I cant stand spending long periods of time in California.
 
With your move back to Cambridge, what are you going to be focusing your energy on? Im curious to hear about the latest-and-greatest that you have planned, though Im sure it will be documented here on your blog in due time.
 
I dont know if you remember, but we sat down for lunch back in the summer of 2005 in Cambridge - perhaps it would be interesting to have lunch together again now, 3 years and two cities later?
 
Quentin
 
posted by Quentin Smith
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
The shallowness is an intriguing point. Doesnt this feeling mostly arise with things that can be considered mainstream, or in places that are much-hyped?
 
Love SF with all of my heart, though. And now feel I might want to visit Boston at some point too.
 
posted by Tommi
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
Hey Aaron!  Too bad to hear that youre leaving San Francisco.. I hear your criticism though, and I grew up in this city.  I think SF can be very shallow, but it depends on who you know and where you spend your time.  The male dominated, startup-filled cafes in the Mission are definitely annoying at times.. its ironic that this incredible place with such diverse projects and brilliance living within it can produce such a predictable overall, wonky culture sometimes.
 
Anyway, good for you for following your gut.  Your post sounds like Paul Grahams post about what cities tell you:
http://www.paulgraham.com/cities.html
 
When are you leaving?  We should get dinner again before you head off
 
posted by Tristan
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
Have you considered a shorter move and a change of crowd? The people to who read books and care about things seem to live in Oakland.
 
posted by Michal Migurski
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
Hey!
 
Itll be good to have you back round here.
 
posted by Mark Bernstein
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
I have also lived in both Cambridge (Porter Sq Harvard Sq was too loud ;) and the Bay Area. I find that there are certainly pros and cons:
 
Boston:
 
I liked the history, and the ability to get to places like Maine in an hour. and NYC in 3+. I liked the crazy road system as I am from London so I felt at home. I liked the people. I did find it a pain in the arse to do simple things though, and the winter. ergh.
 
SF:
 
It feels more like a town than a city. You have to find your niche within. It has taken me awhile to get into it. Being around so much tech can start to be a drain. Sometimes I long for the time when I was living in Madison and noone had a clue what I did ;)
 
And the end of this all, I long for Boulder ;)
 
Heres to you finding your dream location.
 
Cheers,
 
Dion
 
posted by Dion Almaer
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Ive done the Cambridge thing, and am currently doing the Bay Area thing, so I sympathize a bit. Personally, I suggest traveling a bit, and trying out cities around the world. Have some fun. :-)
 
posted by Andrew Wooster
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Well Aaron, you sound like a typical dotcommer, that came, saw, got kicked, and sent back in a body bag.  San Francisco is one of the greatest cultural melting pots, and epicenters of pop culture by far and way behind the likes of Harvard Squarefull of dull bookworms, and..well, squares.  Two-dimensionals.  Enjoy.  :)
 
posted by Leaving Las Vegas
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Your post reminds me of the (famously Bostonian) Mighty Mighty Bosstones song, Almost Anything Goes, which - if Im not mistaken - is largely about nostalgia for Boston over other another city (NYC in that case, but substitute SF and the sentiments the same).
 
posted by Sam Pablo Kuper
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Having to hear jackhammers (and noise in general) is what pushed me away from living in a city environment and into the suburbs. Peace & quiet has been absolutely wonderful for my health, stress level, happiness, and ability to work on projects.
 
posted by Amit Patel
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
I live in Berkeley (across the bay from SF for those who dont know the area), and I also believe that SF is kind of superficial. Berkeley has issues too, but theyre not of the same variety.
 
What I personally dont like about SF is the suffocating trendiness of all the wannabe hipsters with babies on their shoulders, attired in 70s retro-chic t-shirts with carefully made-up hair (made to look not made up) and some kind of wolf-chihuahua or shi-tzu-lhasa-apso flavor-of-the-month hybrid dog in tow.
 
Lots of good stuff comes through town in the way of music though, and the variety and quality of food (for reasonable prices) in restaurants is hard to beat.
 
People are pretty superficial everywhere though, especially the kind of people that think partying and dinner partying with a bunch of different people every week is the peak of existence.
 
I may be wrong, and it may be the case that Cambridge is actually an intellectuals Shangri La that is unlike every other city on the planet (of SF at least), but I suspect that it may be the case that Aaron found a bunch of compatible souls over a relatively long period of time (not by going to parties or quick visits to the library) and that if he went back to Cambridge with a different body and a different name, with the persona he has now (as opposed to that he had when he formed those relationships), and did the things he has talked about doing in SF (going to the library and parties) that his experience would be much the same.
 
posted by JK
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Aaron, I am sorry about your decision. I myself decided to move to the Bay Area (right now I live in New Orleans, which is definitely not the geek or intellectual capital of the USA). Concerning East Coast intellectual dreams: I suggest to move to the real Cambridge, in UK, Eropes (I lived there for 3 months) and I guarantee that your high-browness will be satisfied, although you might still have issues with the weather. You are a very scarce type: a coder/engineer turned philosopher/human intellectual in the US. You have the analytical talent to be successful in philosophy and thereby help a discipline that is not too successful in giving people explanations overall. A lost battle I think. 
I myself started as a biologist, then studied analytical philosophy for 5 years and now I am finally back in science and technology (a reverse direction comparing to yours) so my advice is not advice for you.
Good luck and maybe we can meet at the SciFoo Camp again, Attila 
PS: Oh yeah, and if some day you go to Budapest, where I was born and raised, thats in Hungary, Central Europe, Ill be happy to guide you through the intellectual scenes.
 
posted by Attila Csordas
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
San Francisco is well known as a hard place to relate to  despite all thats going on and all the people seeking something. No one seems to know why. I lived in the city and surrounding areas for about 15 years, then moved to Philadelphia for work. West Philadelphia is fine, except that the whole city is gentrifying, becoming considerably more expensive and driving out good people.
 
I love Harvard Square; went to college there in the 60s and will be visiting at the end of this month. Good Wi-Fi cafes have been scarce right around the Square, but they could be found. There were at least a couple in Central Square. And theres always Somerville.
 
Im working on allowing online financial accounts to actually reproduce children accounts, inherit services, and evolve autonomously through community use  in an open-source project for public benefit. Email me if youre interested. I could meet in Cambridge in the three days or so after June 28, or on a later visit.
 
posted by John S. Jamers
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
And it has actual weather, with real snow and seasons and everything, not this time-stands-still sun that San Francisco insists upon.
 
No! No! This is like It has misery, with cold and wet and everything, not like pleasant sunshine 
 
Buy a pair of sound-deadening ear-protectors to deal with the jackhammers. How anyone could consider that worth exchanging for the slushdrifted streets of Boston in winter, is beyond me.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Welcome back, Aaron. Come hang out at Berkman!
 
posted by Amar
 on June 20, 2008 #
 
awww shite i just moved to sf to meet you
 
posted by marius
 on June 23, 2008 #
 
Lets see. You dont like traffic delays or construction so youre moving back to live under the Big Dig? I understand not being from here and missing the place that you miss. But your SF trashing is pretty hollow. Maybe you just tend to hang out with shallow people. People dont read books in SF? Give me a break But, hey, glad to see you go.
 
posted by "Dave"
 on June 30, 2008 #
 
I jumped in on this thread b/c although my partner and I live in SF, we often  discuss if another city might be better.  Interestingly, one city thats proposed as better is LA, which is stereotypically more shallow  yet not in our experience.   I think the general stereotypes dont apply and a circle of good friends creates its own microcosm effect.
 
JK - I noticed your anti-dinner party comment, and wondered if you would elaborate?  One of the things we most enjoy are dinner parties - and having new people to each one can be a good thing.
 
posted by david
 on September 10, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June 12, 2008
 
Title: Is Undercover Over?
 
My latest piece for Extra! is now up:
 
Is Undercover Over?: Disguise seen as deceit by timid journalists
 
Its about the rise and fall of undercover journalism. Heres an excerpt:
 
Undercover reporting has a storied history. Nellie Bly, famous for traveling around the world in 80 days, also did a famed investigation of the conditions in insane asylums for the New York World. Bly feigned insanity for a series of physicians before being committed to a lunatic asylum. There she documented rotten and spoiled food, freezing living conditions, frigid bathwater, abusive nurses and relatively sane fellow residents. What, excepting torture, would produce insanity quicker than this treatment? she wondered. The series, later published as the book Ten Days in a Mad-House, created a sensation, and Bly was asked to join a government investigation of asylum conditions.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 12, 2008
 
I liked the article and agree with the opinion that it seems to convey.
 
The question running through my head while reading it, Is it really that hard not to get sued? It seems like you can be creative in your deception and double check your allegations. Furthermore, are allegations made by undercover investigations any more likely to spur a lawsuit than those made through more conventional journalism?
 
posted by Alex
 on June 13, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June  9, 2008
 
Title: How to Promote Startups
 
When people talk about how government can promote startups, there seems to be a fairly standard consensus: we need more economic inequality. Lower income and capital gains taxes provide more incentive to work, looser labor laws make it easier to fire non-performers, and large private wealth funds provide investment capital.
 
But having been through a startup myself, I think theres much more you can do in the other direction: decreasing economic inequality. People love starting companies. You get to be your own boss, work on something you love, do something new and exciting, and get lots of attention. As Daniel Brook points out in The Trap, 28% of Americans have considered starting their own business. And yet only 7% actually do.
 
What holds them back? The lack of a social safety net. A friend of mine, a brilliant young technologist whos been featured everywhere from PBS to Salon, stayed in academia and the corporate world while all of her friends were starting companies and getting rich. Why? Because she couldnt afford to lose her health insurance. Between skyrocketing prices and preexisting condition exclusions, its almost impossible for anyone who isnt in perfect health to quit their job. (I only managed because I was on a government plan.)
 
Anyone with children is also straight out. Startup founders tend to be quite young, in no small part because no one can afford to support a family on a startup founders salary. But if we had universal child care, that would be much less of an issue. Parents would be free to pursue their dreams, knowing that their children were taken care of. And universal higher education could let parents spend their savings on getting a business started, instead of their childrens tuition. Plus, itd give many more kids the training and confidence they needed to start a company.
 
And those large private wealth funds that result from growing inequality? A real problem for startup founders is that theyre too large. It used to be that you could borrow a couple thousand dollars from friends and neighbors to get your business off the ground. Nowadays, theyre too busy trying to make ends meet to be able to afford anything like that. Meanwhile, those large wealth funds I mentioned are now so big they can only afford to invest in multi-million dollar chunks  much more than the average founder needs, or can even justify. And the large investments come with large amounts of scrutiny, further narrowing the recipient pool.
 
But imagine if the government provided a basic minimum income, like Richard Nixon once proposed. Instead of having to save up (increasingly difficult in a world in which the only way to survive is on credit card debt) or borrow money to stay afloat, you could live off the government-provided income as you got things started. Suddenly having to quit your job would no longer be such a huge leap  thered be a real social safety net to catch you. (Not to mention if those labor laws some people want to loosen required your old job to take you back if things didnt work out.)
 
Of course, there is some truth to the standard proposals. Some startup founders are encouraged by dreams of financial security, and high taxes can make that dream more elusive. And complex labor regulations can make it difficult to get new companies off the ground. But its not an issue of whether we should have taxes or labor laws  its an issue of how theyre targeted.
 
Estate taxes on inherited fortunes would have basically no impact on startup founders, but could go a long way to funding a social safety net. And since most startups are acquired as stock, income taxes are basically irrelevant  its really capital gains tax that gets applied. Theres no reason the government couldnt apply a lower capital gains tax to startups that get acquired than they do to the shares of publicly-traded companies that large investors trade.
 
The same is true for labor laws: preventing large companies from firing people 
at random can provide some much-needed stability to their lives, especially if theyre saving up money in the hopes of going into business themselves. But theres no reason such laws also have to be applied to small startups, where the company is more likely to go out of business than to fire you.
 
Look at social democratic Europe, where these policy prescriptions have been tried. While theres much less of a culture of entrepreneurship and only 15% of Europeans think about starting their own company, nearly all (14.7%) of them actually go ahead and do it.
 
The fact is, if governments really want to promote startups and the economic innovation they bring, they shouldnt listen to the standard refrain of cut taxes and deregulate. They need to start rebuilding the social safety net, so that their citizens know that if they go out on a limb and try something risky, someone will be there to catch them if things dont work out.
 
Thanks to Daniel Brooks book The Trap: Selling Out to Stay Afloat in Winner-Take-All America for suggesting this line of argument and providing the statistics.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June  9, 2008
 
I definitely would have quit my job and started my own company long ago if I had access affordable health insurance outside work. But Im not entirely sure that would have been a good decision. While I agree with everything you say here, it still feels like there are some subtle positive aspects of the current environment we may lose with a safety net, e.g. forcing better planning of startups by making them contingent on better life planning. I dont imagine those are anywhere near worth the pitfalls of the current environment, but it would be good to consider them further to ease the transition.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
hi Aaron, this is a very interesting entry! you might be interested by the debates and analyses of the idea of an universal unconditional income, there are several authors discussing it but the books Real Freedom for All by Philippe Van Parijs, and Redesigning Distribution edited by Bruce Ackerman, Anne Alstott and Van Parijs (avail. for free online), are worth reading.
 
posted by pierre
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
Good post.
As an entrepreneur in Israel, having high quality government funded healthcare has certainly helped me bootstrap my current startup. My calculations would have been very different if I had to take health insurance into account.
 
Im not sure though that your conclusion regarding Europeans (where almost all who consider starting a business actually do it) is necessarily correct. 
Maybe in a culture where entrepreneurship isnt as glamorous as it is in the US, those who profess that they consider starting a business are only the real die-hard born-to-be-entrepreneurs, essentially the same people who manage to overcome the hurdles in the US and do their own thing at all costs? 
In a place like California (or Israel for that matter), where entrepreneurship is admired, many more people consider it, or would tell you so in a survey, even though theyre not really serious. I have friends who keep talking about starting their own business, but would probably never do it - not because they lack the wherewithal, but because they havent really got it in them.
 
Moreover, starting a company in most countries of western Europe is much harder than it is in the US. It takes financial commitment up-front, as well as going through a lot of bureaucracy. The state, while it provides the social safety net, puts serious hurdles in the would-be business owners way, and you could argue that these are just as bad as the lack of a safety net.
 
posted by Elad Kehat
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
I think you miss the main problem: sheer time availability.  See my full response here:
 
http://www.cincomsmalltalk.com/blog/blogView?showComments=true&printTitle=Why_so_few_do_startups&entry=3390474479
 
posted by James Robertson
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
Your voice is getting stronger, Aaron. Youre doing good work.
 
URLS for the books Pierre mentions above:
 
Redesigning Distribution
 
Real Freedom For All
 
posted by Bob Erb
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
If you love Iceland so much why dont you go and live there!!111eleventy!1
 
As a longtime professional tracker-of-startups, I note without surprise how many of mine are in Australia, Ireland and Israel now.
 
Scott Reynan: if US entrepreneurs are indeed motivated by fear of bankruptcy, most of them are behaving in remarkably self-defeating ways.
 
posted by Yatima
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
+1, Aaron.
 
Im a parent of 2, and its frustrating as all hell that I cant work out a way to start a startup without putting my family at risk.
 
Its fairly well established that no angel or VC investor will want to look at you until youve at the very least finished a prototype, more likely not until youve finished the product, and even more likely not until youve shown traction by attracting a decent number of users.  In the meantime, that probably means a good year of going without income in order to get to that point.  Whos got the kind of money to keep a family afloat during that time?!?!?!?  Some of us werent born with rich family or friends.
 
I havent figured a way out of this conundrum yet, but Im damn well going to because I refuse to go my whole life working for someone else.  (Most likely in order to fund this Ill have to sell my home, and rent in a cheaper location for a while.)
 
But it sure is good to hear someone going against the conventional wisdom (aka bullshit) on this issue and telling it like it is, Aaron.
 
Meritocracy, my ass!  The startup world is a plutocracy, pure and simple.  If you dont have someone with big bucks behind you, youre shut out.  The only people whose merit matters are the ones who are able to pony up the ante.
 
posted by DAR
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
(A pingback for some of the discussion on hacker news.)
 
I have to say I strongly agree with this. The personal risks I am taking to start a company, are a little crazy, and Ive had no shortage of people telling me so. And I know so many people who are waiting for their life to be settled and stable before they begin. This is one of the main social influences repressing our potential founders.
 
http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=213181
 
and
 
http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=213210
 
posted by Danielle Fong
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
To DAR:
 
What makes you think the rest of us owe you a living?  In life you get to make choices, and you value your family above the pursuit of a startup.  Thats one possible choice.  Why should the rest of us have to pay to give you infinite choices?
 
You might ponder TANSTAAFL.
 
posted by James Robertson
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
Yes, doing a startup is hard for a family, but what about the plan where one spouse gets a corporate job, and the other starts a business?
 
posted by Don Marti
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
I think one reason Europeans are less likely to consider starting their own companies is that employment conditions even in low-end jobs tend to be better here (longer holidays, higher minimum wages, etc).
 
posted by Sam Pablo Kuper
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
How many of these policies would you support even if they had zero impact on startups?  I ask because all your suggestions that are particular to startups actually involve the standard refrain of cut taxes and deregulate
 
Things that are good for everyone are good for everyone but I cant but help notice that your more socialist suggestions are about people not like you (help families and older people, stick it to big business, etc) and your more free market suggestions apply to areas where you have local experience.
 
posted by Jack Diederich
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
Is this satire? Because I really dont see how it could be anything else, except perhaps insanity.
 
The problem with providing these sorts of benefits to everyone is that it removes nearly all extrinsic motivations for work. Unfortunately, I believe that youll find that the fraction of the human population that is intrinsically motivated to work is by no means large enough to support the entire populationand if this is the case, then the reforms you propose would eventually cause the collapse of civilization (assuming that someone did not eventually stop the madness).
 
posted by Dave
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
Yes, Nixon must have been proposing the collapse of civilization. That must be why Denmark and Sweden are no longer on the map.
 
Give me a break.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
How many start-ups are coming out of Denmark and Sweden?  Adjusted for population, are there more or less than are coming out of the US?
 
-Mark
 
posted by Mark
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
Pardon my ignorance, but if one is young ind relatively healthy (and you better be if you are going to work in a startup), what does one need health insurance for?
 
posted by Nickolai Leschov
 on June 11, 2008 #
 
Great minds move in
 
The Basic Income Guarantee is championed eloquently by Martin Luther King, Jr.
 
http://www.cooperativeindividualism.org/king-martin-luther_on-poverty.html
 
Its from his last book.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on June 11, 2008 #
 
Why do you think people who start companies need to be relatively healthy? My health problems never affected my startup work.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on June 11, 2008 #
 
I agree with some of your arguments, particularly the one about health insurance. I mean, survive you must, and fear of dying doesnt help startup founders to be bold.
 
But I also know how incredibly hard it is in many european countries to get your own business started, and to a large degree it is hard because of the safety net that others enjoy.
 
That famous european safety net has one salient characteristic. Its much better for those groups who are better organised and who have a long tradition of being close to the government and the political parties. Pensioners, workers in well unionised sectors, farmers, civil servants, railway workers, medical doctors, teachers, etc.
 
As a startup founder, almost by definition, you dont belong to any of those groups. When I started my first business, I had to pay hugely more social security contributions and taxes than any 9 to 5 worker (relative to my meagre income). Effectively, I had to pay for their safety net, a safety net that partly excludes entrepreneurs. If I couldve just kept my own money, pay nothing and get nothing, I wouldve been better off.
 
I agree that a basic safety net that catches you when you fall is a good thing. But that european safety net catches like 80% of the people, costs almost 50% of our income and fails many of those who actually need it. I wonder if that is an automatic consequence of democratically organised redistribution.
 
posted by fauigerzigerk
 on June 11, 2008 #
 
To DAR:
 
What makes you think the rest of us owe you a living? In life you get to make choices, and you value your family above the pursuit of a startup. Thats one possible choice. Why should the rest of us have to pay to give you infinite choices?
 
You might ponder TANSTAAFL.
 
Dude, I think you are either totally messedup or just plain trying to garner some attention. Indendently speaking, I can understand and appreciate your statement. Having read DARs comment though, I fail to see the connection that you are trying to imply. The mans just trying to vent his frustration that the current attitude of VCs and such like is such that it does not allow for any leeway of risk such as having a family. TANSTAAFL indeed. For you, I would have to respond - GTFOH*
 
*Get the Finnegan outta here.
 
posted by Timmy Jose
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
To DAR:
 
What makes you think the rest of us owe you a living? In life you get to make choices, and you value your family above the pursuit of a startup. Thats one possible choice. Why should the rest of us have to pay to give you infinite choices?
 
You might ponder TANSTAAFL.
 
@ Robertson
 
Dude, I think you are either totally messedup or just plain trying to garner some attention. Indendently speaking, I can understand and appreciate your statement. Having read DARs comment though, I fail to see the connection that you are trying to imply. The mans just trying to vent his frustration that the current attitude of VCs and such like is such that it does not allow for any leeway of risk such as having a family. TANSTAAFL indeed. For you, I would have to respond - GTFOH*
 
*Get the Finnegan outta here.
 
posted by Timmy Jose
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
Great post, Aaron. By the way, not exactly start-up related, but similar reasons were a major economic factor driving me to abandon my civil-liberties activism. It was just too dangerous to risk lack of employment.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
Your intro paragraph infers it all: we need more economic inequality. Lower income and capital gains taxes provide more incentive to work, looser labor laws make it easier to fire non-performers, and large private wealth funds provide investment capital. <br/>
This statement is not economic theory: not that you state it is, but rather that mainstream business and politics tell us it is.  This construct is barely even economic hypothesis; not even well founded wishful thinking. Rather wolfish greed wrapped in lambskin. <br/>
I have been an IT entrepreneur for 20 years and never consider those economic principals when making my start-up decisions.  I have only accomplished my most recent startup, ShellShadow because I am living in China now and have economic leverage to do so on a tight budget.<br/>
The theory that people create due to economic inequality is pure bunk.  People can get very rich due to economic inequality but it has little to do with creativity or a desire to create.
 
posted by Jon Hancock
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
Aaron:
 
Lack of adequate healthcare affects some 25 million Americans, a significant portion of them, like me, who are working citizens who contribute to the system in the form of taxes, and sometimes, cash payments for medical services needed. I think its shameful that we cant even get a basic level of standard medical protection for our nation all because of greed, greed, greed. I feel for all those people who find themselves in the position of being forced to chose bankruptcy due to a pressing illness.
 
posted by Anthony Kuhn
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
The safety net is a good pointyou are right, it was previously friends and family, but today most are tapped out.
 
However, instead of the government stepping in, what if friends, family, spouses, and want-to-be entrepenuers stopped promising away their entire current and future income (via mortgages and loans) so that they could go back to being the social safety net that they once were?
 
My grandparents at several times lived with other family, and several times had other family live with them, while starting out. And so while they used mortgages and loans, it wasnt so early and so leveraged that they could no longer be a safety net for others.
 
Granted, their lifestyle was not what most people likely expect these daysbut that is a trade off everyone is free to make, lower your lifestyle today and have more choices, or raise your lifestyle today and have less choices.
 
(Basically, DAG is righthe should sell the house he can only afford on a 30-year corporate salary and rent in a cheaper location. That is economic tradeoffs and it works much better when individuals make these decisions for themselves instead of the government deciding for the whole citizenship that it knows best.)
 
I also wonder how much the lack of a safety net is real or just perceived due to our individualistic, self-reliant culture.
 
Granted, I admire your goals, but good goals doesnt mean that, once in place, a program will automatically acheive those goals. Goals vs. incentives is discussed nicely in Basic Economics by Thomas Sowell.
 
posted by Stephen
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
Im surprised you didnt mention behavioral economics to explain the statistics. Isnt it obvious that the biggest barrier to start-ups is risk aversion? When I tell people Im working for a startup, the vast majority of responses is oooh, risky!.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on June 14, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 19, 2008
 
Title: The False Consciousness Falsehood
 
American intellectual life has a large number of ways of responding to an argument without actually addressing its substance  namecalling in other words. You can say that someone is blaming the victim or spinning a conspiracy theory or assuming people are stupid or that theyre subject to false consciousness.
 
Most of these are kind of transparently silly, but even otherwise smart people seem to think the false consciousness charge has some heft to it. The argument is never fully spelled-out, but the argument seems to be that to think that people are systematically mistaken about their own interests is the kind of crazy idea that only vulgar Marxists would believe and, furthermore, it requires assuming that people are stupid and explaining how youve been able to see past the illusion.
 
Well, Im personally not under any illusion that providing a rational explanation is going to stop people from leveling this charge, but I figure one ought to, if only to set the record straight.
 
Lets begin with a parable  a simplified case that will at least establish whether some of these arguments are logically true. Imagine a new regime comes to power that decides to imprison everyone with red hair. They insist that there is nothing amiss about this  they were elected democratically, and furthermore, everyone imprisoned is still allowed to vote. But inside the prisons, they only permit limited contact with the outside world. Most prisoners only watch the one prison-provided news station which is systematically biased, constantly suggesting that the Purple Party is in favor of additional rights for red-haired people while their opponents, the Yellow Party, just used the red-haired issue for pandering. (Anyone whos watched, say, Fox News discuss black issues will know how this is possible.) The result is that when election time rolls around, the majority of red-haired prisoners vote for the Purple Party candidate who gets into power and provides no new rights for them.
 
Call it false consciousness or not, I think its perfectly reasonable to look at this situation and say while the red-haired prisoners are not stupid, they are systematically mistaken, which is leading them to act against their own interests. If they knew the truth they would vote for the Yellow Party, the party which wants to take steps to get them out of prison, instead. Furthermore, its possible to imagine that there are some prisoners who, through one means or another, have learned this and thus are able to see this situation while the other prisoners do not. (They try to tell the other prisoners whats going on, but they keep getting labeled conspiracy theorists.)
 
Now obviously vast portions of America are not imprisoned. But most people do get their news from a small number of sources and I think everyone would agree that, in one way or another, these sources are systematically biased. (You can argue about which way theyre biased or whether it makes a difference, but I think its pretty clear that all the major news sources share a general conception of what is news and what isnt.) So why is it so implausible that something similar is going on?
 
The major difference between the two scenarios is that in the first, people were basically forced to watch the biased news, while in the real world they have lots of other alternatives. But Im not sure this matters as much as it might seem at first.
 
First, most people have busy lives that dont revolve around the news or politics and thus are going to get the news in the most convenient form they can. For most people, this is typically television or the newspaper. But starting a new television station or newspaper is very expensive, especially if you want it to have wide reach, and the only projects that can get funding and advertising are those that buy into at least some of the systematic biases. So for most people, there simply isnt a better alternative when it comes to the formats they want.
 
Second, even if someone gets their news from the Internet or another source where getting started is less expensive, they may not know about the alternatives. If you grew up with your parents reading the New York Times you may simply live your life checking in on nytimes.com, without ever stopping to wonder whether the news you were getting was systematically biased and whether there was some more preferable alternative.
 
Again, just as there was no way for the prisoners to know they were being lied to, its not really reasonable for the average person to figure out that theyre getting biased news if the only news they read comes from biased sources.
 
Now Im not arguing here that this idea is true (that would require more real-world evidence), merely that its possible. The fact is that we live in a world where most people get their information about whats going on from a very small number of sources which tend to report largely the same things in the same way. This seems like a rather important fact of life and I think we ought to stop dismissing suggestions that it might have some negative effects on people out of hand.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 19, 2008
 
The argument is never fully spelled-out, but the argument seems to be that Sounds like a strawman. Do you have any actual examples of this argument being made?
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on May 19, 2008 #
 
I think one major reluctance to accepting conspiracy theories on a large level is that, to reference a previous post, people dont believe that the mechanism exists.  If there was media bias of a malevolent sort, then there must be a conspiracy to construct and enforce that bias.  Editors punish their subordinates.  Editors themselves must be informed of what the accepted lines of thought are.  People have proposed mechanisms for this, have documented actual processes.  But its not clear that those form the bias, because for everyplace that has such hints of conspiracy there is a large number of places that clearly have no conspiracy (often just for lack of interestingness).
 
Another aspect is none of this seems new.  Its not like the media was crazy progressive and then this darn media consolidation came along and ruined it.  Is this the product of a long line of conspiracies?  The masons?
 
Im more apt to see this as a phenomena than a conspiracy.  That is, accepting that people can have false beliefs on a large scale doesnt require a malevolent actor.  Theres lots of cases of this that are rather obvious in retrospect.  Flat Earth  that people have at times widely believed the Earth to be flat is not a sign of wide stupidity.  Our intuitions can be reasonable while also being incorrect.  Revealing the truth does not automatically convert everyones belief.
 
The mechanisms by which we come to other beliefs is probably different than something so fact-based as the nature of the surface of the Earth.  But theres obviously more involved than simple rationality, especially because many value-based beliefs are rooted in underlying motivations that cant really be rational.
 
posted by Ian Bicking
 on May 19, 2008 #
 
Hope all is well, and that your health has improved after that discouraging post from a few months ago.  I think what youre talking about is whats plausible rather than whats logical or rational. It would be just as valid to spin a self-serving parable demonstrating how the idea of false consciousness fails to explain events, and wed have learned as much from the exercise. I also dont understand the point of the conclusion: that its merely possible the idea of false consciousness can be valid, given an impressive stack of assumptions. And?
 
posted by sierra
 on May 20, 2008 #
 
With reference to a previous post:  Im not sure what counts as a mechanism.  How about putting oilmen in charge of regulating the oil business and Mideast policy?  How about controlling the flow of informatione.g. concealing M3 monetary levels, refusing to allow photos of troop caskets, putting the financing apparatus for an entire foreign adventure (often referred to as a war) off budget, selling off public spaces, lands, and airwaves?
 
Aaron, Ive only just discovered your blog and am intrigued by it.  Drop by over at http://wisdomofthewest.blogspot.com/  You might find something interesting.  My latest series is on the phenomenon of crowds and swarms and I happened onto your site while searching the stupidity of crowds.
 
Best,
Jim H.
 
posted by Jim H.
 on May 21, 2008 #
 
Reading the post again, the first couple of paragraphs strike me as confusing. The first states that saying someone is subject to false consciousness is a way of avoiding the substance of any argument hes making  namecalling in other words. The second says essentially the opposite: that criticizing this assignment of false consciousness is an invalid form of namecalling, i.e., by labeling the idea of false consciousness as crazy or Marxist. (The first paragraph only makes sense in the context of the rest of the post if it ends with something like: or assigning false consciousness to people.)
 
These opening paragraphs are amusing as well. After being told this charge constitutes namecalling, we learn it is transparently silly. Unintelligent people can of course be expected to make such a charge, but even otherwise smart people make it as well. Regardless, youre not under any illusion that providing a rational explanation is going to stop people from leveling this charge. So: silly, stupid, and irrational. Nope, no namecalling here.
 
posted by sierra
 on May 22, 2008 #
 
Aaron
 
You should check out the blog Unqualified Reservations.  He makes a pretty convincing case that the biases in the media are indeed systematic.
See
http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/06/separation-of-information-and-security.html
and
http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/06/why-theres-no-such-thing-as-liberal.html
 
Whats interesting is that you dont need a conspiracy theory to get the result of conspiracy theory.  All you need to do is look at the selection process.  Can an economics professor be fired for being wrong?  Nope.  But a professor can get more grants and power by justifying the prevailing political powers.
 
Were Bill Kristol and Tom Friedman fired for being wrong about the war in Iraq?  Bill Kristol was promoted to the NY Times editorial page!
 
If the media and educational system do not seem to be promoting or firing people based on whether they get things right and wrong, why would we expect the process to produce accurate results?
 
posted by Patrick
 on May 23, 2008 #
 
You have some truly bizarre spam just above this comment.
 
I agree with Sierra that the first couple of paragraphs are muddled.  From the rest of your essay, youre apparently claiming that the charge of false consciousness should be taken seriously in a debate.  But thats not how you start off.
 
I think it is possible for people to be systematically mistaken about this or that, and its reasonable to discuss that possibility in itself, as you start to do here.
 
But in an ordinary discussion about some other subject, accusing your opponent of false consciousness is not an argument, its a failure to argue.  Its an example of the logical fallacy poisoning the well.  Reasonable people are right to reject it in those cases.
 
posted by Matt C
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
Matts comment made me wonder what kind of criteria would make the idea of false consciousness valid. I think it would require a good deal of ignorance or physical coercion, and would be least likely in an information-saturated modern society. E.g., Ive heard many women in strict Islamic cultures express strong approval for their burkas, but its valid to assume (if theyre not lying outright) thats false consciousness resulting from the constant threat of beating or worse if they dont wear a burka, or perhaps from having no accurate information on societies where women wear whatever they want. The flip-side, to use an obvious example: In this culture, women arent beaten for being pro-choice on abortion, and they have plenty of pro-choice information available to them, so its correspondingly invalid to suggest pro-life women suffer from false consciousness. Aarons parable is unconvincing because it involves taking great pains to limit available information, which simply is not our situation. The idea that people with huge numbers of alternative media sources available to them are going to keep reading the New York Times out of blind habit is contradicted by the latters stock price, and by the sudden, spontaneous popularity of sites like YouTube, Facebook, you name it.
 
Theres an excellent book called Sick Societies, by the anthropologist Harold Edgerton. Ostensibly its a critique of the idea that primitive cultures are peaceful and harmonious, and that all sorts of horrifying (to us) practices are adaptive in the evolutionary sense. But the more interesting implication is the possibility of determining whether aspects of our own culture are objectively dysfunctional, criteria he says may be borrowed from psychology. Im skeptical how rigorous that framework would be, but its an interesting book thats relevant to the question, if you care to take a look.
 
posted by sierra
 on June 15, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 14, 2008
 
Title: Tectonic Plates and Microfoundations
 
In 1915, Alfred Wegener argued that all the continents of Earth once used to fit together as one giant supercontinent, which he later named Pangea. As Wikipedia summarizes:
 
In his work, Wegener presented a large amount of circumstantial evidence in support of continental drift, but he was unable to come up with a convincing mechanism. Thus, while his ideas attracted a few early supporters  the hypothesis was generally met with skepticism. The one American edition of Wegeners work  was received so poorly that the American Association of Petroleum Geologists organized a symposium specifically in opposition.  By the 1930s, Wegeners geological work was almost universally dismissed by the scientific community and remained obscure for some thirty years.
 
Today, of course, every schoolchild knows about Pangea. But for a long time the theory was dismissed, not because it lacked evidence or predictive power  it explained why the shapes of the continents fit together, why mountain ranges and coal fields lined up, why similar fossil were found in places separated by oceans, and so on  but because Wegener had no plausible mechanism.
 
A similar problem happens in the social sciences. Paul Krugman recently noted that while Larry Bartels (in his new book Unequal Democracy) provides solid, convincing evidence that Republican presidents systematically preside over slower growth and increasing inequality, most social scientists dont believe him because we havent yet identified the mechanisms. Krugman:
 
Now, Im a big Bartels fan; Ive known about this result for quite a while. But Ive never written it up. Why? Because I cant figure out a plausible mechanism. Even though I believe that politics has a big effect on income distribution, this is just too strong  and too immediate  for me to see how it can be done. Sure, Republicans want an oligarchic society  but how can they do that?
 
Bartels, for his part, argues that providing the mechanisms isnt his job  his goal is to highlight the phenomena and encourage many others to research the mechanisms:
 
How do presidents produce these substantial effects?
 
One of my aims in writing Unequal Democracy was to prod economists and policy analysts to devote more attention to precisely that question. Douglas Hibbs did important work along these lines  He found that Democrats favored expansionary policies  while Republicans endured and sometimes prolonged recessions in order to keep inflation in check. (Not coincidentally, unemployment mostly affects income growth among relatively poor people, while inflation mostly affects income growth among relatively affluent people.) In recent decades taxes and transfers have probably been more important. Social spending. Business regulation or lack thereof. And dont forget the minimum wage. Over the past 60 years, the real value of the minimum wage has increased by 16 cents per year under Democratic presidents and declined by 6 cents per year under Republican presidents; thats a 3% difference in average income growth for minimum wage workers, with ramifications for many more workers higher up the wage scale. So, while I dont pretend to understand all the ways in which presidents policy choices shape the income distribution, I see little reason to doubt that the effects are real and substantial.
 
When it comes to addressing such arguments more generally, the most famous commentator is Jon Elster. In his classic article Marxism, Functionalism, and Game Theory, he insists:
 
Without a firm knowledge about the mechanisms that operate at the individual level, the grand Marxist claims about macrostructures and long-term change are condemned to remain at the level of speculation.
 
(To be fair, Elster doesnt make this as a general argument, but his vehemence has led some of his followers to suggest that it is.)
 
To be clear, I think discovering mechanisms is important work. All Im arguing is that it shouldnt be a necessity for believing in a theory. Instead, I believe its an irrational side-effect of an emotional distaste for gaps in knowledge.
 
As evidence, let me note that such demands for mechanisms never go more than one level deep. Nobody has ever said, Well, your theory that people are motivated by greed is all very nice, but I just cant believe it until you can explain how greed is manifested in the brain. Neuroscience is obviously the microfoundation of psychology, but psychological theories are regularly accepted without neuroscientific microfoundations.
 
In general, it seems like such commentators support a double-standard. Theories with mechanisms should be judged by their fit with the evidence and predictive power. Theories without mechanisms should be judged by the evidence and predictive power and whether you can think of any plausible mechanisms. I dont see how this can be justified. Theres no reason mechanism should be privileged in the assessment of knowledge; things are true or false, even if we dont know why they are true or false.
 
Indeed, it we typically only investigate the causes of phenomena once were convinced that they exist. (Elster admits as much in Explaining Social Behavior, noting that establishing a phenomenas existence is the first step towards explaining it.) So lets stop making the mistake of not believing things are true because we dont know how they happen.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 14, 2008
 
Without a mechanism, how can we distinguish between cause and effect?  Perhaps people turn to Republicans because of other actually causal phenomena.  And frankly, in any social situation, causality just wont be there  too many feedback loops and too many independent actors.
 
If all someone is arguing for is correlation, then thats a rather boring thing to argue about.  Causation is the thing that is exciting.
 
Even causation can be a little boring.  Causation that can be effected and changed, now that is interesting.
 
The scientific approach then would be to empirically determine what can cause change.  What are electrons, or protons, or quarks?  Eh, who knows, but we know how we can manipulate things with them, how we can see the side effects.  Social theory often seems more interested in what these things are, as though there is some value to the thing itself, and not so interested in what can be done.
 
posted by Ian Bicking
 on May 14, 2008 #
 
You seem to believe that not having a mechanism limits you to making claims about correlation, not causation. Thats not true at all. Imagine someone gave you a red button and pressing it caused a man to shout yap! You can clearly establish a causal connection  do double-blind tests if you have to  even if you have no idea how it makes the man say that.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 14, 2008 #
 
I would say its sometimes not an easy task to figure out whats true but unexplained, what seems to be true but is a thinking error, whats lies that are just widely repeated, whats correlation but not causation, whats finding spurious coincidences, etc.
 
Yes, things are true or false - but you dont know which is which beforehand.
 
Politics can be especially hard, since there are people who have as their jobs making the false seem true, and the true seem false.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on May 14, 2008 #
 
Interesting post, which I generally agree with.  But this In general, it seems like such commentators support a double-standard is incorrect.
 
Theres one standard: Theories should be judged by the evidence and predictive power and whether you can think of any plausible mechanisms.  It just happens that for theories with mechanisms you can, in fact, think of plausible mechanisms.
 
Otherwise its like arguing  a double-standard. Theories without evidence are to be judged by their predictive power and whether you can think of any evidence.  Theories with evidence are to be judged by their predictive power alone.
 
posted by David Montgomery
 on May 14, 2008 #
 
I agree that this is an interesting correlation, and in general that we should look for mechanisms
 
But at the same time we should always worry that the effect might not exist. For this one I know of three objections:
 
It needs a one-year lag between president and income. Thats not implasible but its one more parameter.
 
It uses pre-tax family income, from income tax I think? This is somewhat succeptible to adjustments to minimise tax paid. Higher taxes can scare the rich into sheltering income somehow. (I think this is the same data that leads to an underestimate of inequality in the 70s, for this reason.)
 
Werent the republicans supposed to be the party of fiscal prudence, earlier in this data set? In other words the categories shift over time.
 
posted by improbable
 on May 15, 2008 #
 
Shame on you, Aaron. You should know better than to look for awkward correlations between enormous generalizations.
 
I dont know enough to argue, but even if there is a correlation between Dems and progress, we should be careful what you do with such correlations.
 
Consider one of those old hand-powered water pumps. Observing someone operating the pump would lead you to conclude that there is a clear correlation between pushing down on the handle and water coming out. Surely, we would be tempted to conclude, there is no point to lifting the handle at all. To maximize the amount of water we get, we should just sit on the handle.
 
Our economic and political systems are much more complicated than we have so far been able to comprehend, and looking for correlations between changing political labels and imprecise economic measurements is silly.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on May 17, 2008 #
 
Just FYI, the time-stamp on comments seems to be ~2 days off.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on May 17, 2008 #
 
People weigh a lot of factors when deciding whether a theory is plausible.  If you have a demonstrated mechanism, that makes a theory more plausible than if youve just imagined up a possible mechanism.
 
Its not irrational to include it in the factors weighed, even if it would be irrational to make it a be-all-and-end-all criterion for plausibility.
 
posted by 
 on May 18, 2008 #
 
Maybe a concrete example would help.  If my computer crashes while Im depressed, I dont even seriously consider the possibility that it did so because Im depressed.  If it does so 10 times, and none when Im cheerful, then I start to wonder, but again, suspect that Im missing something else thats actually causing it.  If it happens 1000 times, and none when Im cheerful, and I cant find any more plausible causes, then I start to accept that its caused by my depression, even though it seems unlikely, i.e. despite the lack of plausible mechanism.
 
posted by 
 on May 18, 2008 #
 
I write about medical research. Here, people are more likely to believe a drug works if a plausible mechanism is known. But this is almost entirely because a plausible mechanism gives a boost to difficult decision-making under uncertainty. If there is clear empirical evidence, then people will use an important drug whether any mechanism is available or not.
 
Thanks for letting me know about Unequal Democracy, and the strong evidence of a Democratic/Republican difference. Clearly presidents can do a lot to mess up the country. If they can do it in part by changing widespread public attitudes and assumptions (as seems plausible), then the time frame to make actual changes could be a day or less. Of course the economic statistics will need some time to catch up.
 
posted by John S James
 on May 20, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 13, 2008
 
Title: Simplistic Sociological Functionalism
 
(I thought I should talk about the other form of functionalism for a change.)
 
Often sociologists notice a pattern in which certain attributes of a social system fits well with a particular social structure. To take an example I have at hand, Rosabeth Moss Kanter notes that because a secretary has access to facts that could embarrass her boss, its convenient for the boss that the secretary is entirely dependent upon him for wages and status.
 
Unfortunately, these claims are often phrased as saying X causes Y. Heres how Kanter does it:
 
The possibilities for blackmail inherent in [a secretarys] access  to the real story behind the bosss secrets  made it important that she identify her interest as running with, rather than against, his. Thus, forces were generated for the maintenance of a system in which the secretary  was to find her status and reward level dependent on the status and, hence, success of her boss. (Men and Women of the Corporation, 82)
 
Note that, although she is unusually careful to hedge her comments (made it important, forces were generated, maintenance of a system) Kanter is making a particular historical claim here: the secretary could blackmail, which pushed the boss to tighten control. But this is not the type of claim that Kanter, whos research consisted mostly of direct observation of present-day offices, is likely to have any real evidence for.
 
Making such claims is problematic, both because most sociologists dont really know whether they are strictly true, and because they lead Jon Elster to show up at your house and yell at you for hours. But both problems can be easily avoided: simply rephrase such comments to describe the phenomena as effects rather than causes.
 
Instead of saying a secretarys ability to blackmail leads bosses to tighten their grip, simply note that the bosss tight grip has the effect of weakening the secretarys ability to blackmail. You get all the same points across and nobody gets hurt. See? Easy.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 13, 2008
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 12, 2008
 
Title: How to Fix the News
 
Newspaper circulation continues to decline. The top-selling paper in the country, USA Today, distributes only 2 million copies a day (half, no doubt, placed outside hotel room doors). Around the same number, with an average age of 71, watch The OReilly Factor nightly, with the number decreasing as the audience dies off. Everyone quietly concedes the news industry is dying. Its the Internets fault, they all assure us.
 
But what if it wasnt? The other day I heard a news program that was so good that I wanted to listen to it again. And Im not alone  all my friends have been talking about it as well. And while I dont have exact numbers, it seems as popular as any one of those other news outlets. That show? The This American Life episode on The Global Pool of Money  a comprehensive explanation of the housing mess.
 
There were three things about the show that made it stand out from the rest of the news pack:
 
It believed in the intelligence of its audience. It didnt try to pander with sex or disasters or quick cuts. It took a serious news story and investigated it thoroughly for a full hour, with only one break. And it didnt try and dumb any of it down  it explained the whole thing, from top to bottom.
 
It didnt assume you already knew the subject. Most news stories on important topics are incomprehensible to the average person who doesnt know much about their topic. Heres a quote from a random news story about the housing crisis: They said financial institutions have been unwilling to expose themselves to the mortgage market, and lenders are hesitant to lend to risky borrowers in a declining house price market after the subprime meltdown. Unless youve been following the story (like the reporter, presumably) do you really know what that means? TAL instead assumed you knew nothing and explained every component and term so that you actually had a picture of what was going on.
 
It was done in an entertaining and conversational tone. It didnt treat the news as some important series of facts that had to be seriously conveyed to you. It treated it as something interesting they wanted to tell you about, a story that involved real peoples lives (who you got to hear from at length) and was full of genuinely interesting pieces. Look at that news quote above one more time. Can you really imagine someone sitting down and saying that with a straight face?
 
At first these things may seem contradictory  how can you believe in the intelligence of your audience while assuming they dont know anything? how can you be entertaining and yet still explain a subject?  but the more you think about them you see how well they fit together. Being intelligent doesnt mean youre knowledgeable; it means youre curious. Which means you want to hear the whole story from beginning to end and which means you might actually find it entertaining. And being conversational prevents you from assuming the mask that lets you talk down to your audience while pretending they only need to hear the handful of new facts that youre providing.
 
In every other field, that kind of formality has been dropped. Even banks run advertisements these days about how their associates will be your friend. And yet the news chugs along with its arrogant formality, watching its audience get older and older, and wondering why its circulation is declining.
 
Together, these three points seem like the recipe for a genuine news show: intelligent, comprehensive, and entertaining. And yet, I cant think of a single thing that follows them. Surely in an era of desperation and experimentation, the wacky idea of actually respecting your audience has to be worth a try by someone. Anyone want to give it a shot?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 12, 2008
 
I too enjoyed the NPR/This American Life The Global Pool of Money programme.   But, there has been plenty of good coverage in the press if you chose to look.  See e.g. http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2008/apr/08/creditcrunch.banking .
 
And Im not so sure that the news is broken.  The decline in sales is probably indicative of some other wider (societal) issue.
 
posted by Benjamin
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
That article conveys far less information and is a lot less readable than the TAL piece. Its a pretty standard long newspaper feature and I cant imagine the average person understanding the situation from it or even getting thru it. (Compare Susan Faludis introduction to her book Backlash to her newspaper article on LBOs and youll see how impossible it is to do good work in that format.)
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
If you really want an alternative, heres a much better piece of journalism on the subject:
 
http://docs.google.com/TeamPresent?docid=ddp4zq7n_0cdjsr4fn&skipauth=true
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
I agree that the TAL piece was excellent, but I wouldnt say that the Guardian pieces conveys far less information.  Perhaps the Guardian didnt touch on the relaxation of regulations for US mortgage applications prior to the crunch, but the general story and main issues (viz. nature of CDOs and rating agency mistakes) are still there.
 
Unfortunately many (most?) things are inherently complex and require more than a 2 minute segment in a news programme to allow viewers/readers to gain a thorough understanding.   My view is that the news media merely point out a subset of stories  usually relevant to only them and or their publishers/owners  and leave it to us to find out more.
 
I dont think there is enough time in the day to allow one hour programmes examining each and every pressing issue arising in the world.
 
posted by Benjamin
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
I dont think there is enough time in the day to allow one hour programmes examining each and every pressing issue arising in the world.
 
Luckily the pressing issues dont change every day; a daily one hour program could cover each of them in turn and convey much more understanding than traditional news.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
Absolutely agree with you, Aaron.  That program is a gem, as are many other programs on NPR.  Wish a greater portion of the folks who appreciate these programs would pony up even a modest amount of financial support for public radio; maybe then I wouldnt have to deal with the aggravating and all-too-frequent pledge drives :(
 
posted by Adam
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
Citation for the average age of OReilly Factor viewers?  Or was that a joke?
 
posted by John
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
From the few eps Ive heard online (including this one), This American Life does a fantastic job at telling stories in a compelling way.  Its funny to hear the reporters continually remind you of the individual personalities involved in a storyeven one as big as the credit crisisyou can tell they really try to personalize a story to give it life.
 
Cable news is like information candy.  This feels more nourishing.
 
posted by Kevin W.
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
This is frivolous, but I cant stand listening to Ira Glass (or almost anyone else on NPR, for that matter).  I dont suppose theres a transcript?
 
posted by Cosma
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
And Im not alone  all my friends have been talking about it as well.
 
As the apocryphal story runs How could Richard Nixon have won? Everyone I know voted for McGovern!
 
I enjoy TAL too  but more relevantly, you might note they eke out a living on the fringes of the media world, competing with rant-radio and pop-music. Quality is a hard sell in terms of profitability.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
The 71 number comes from this NYT article from 2006 on Olbermann.
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/07/11/arts/television/11keit.html
 
MSNBCs research claims that the median age for Mr. OReillys audience is 71, while Mr. Olbermanns is 59. (Fox and CNN both report that the only figures they get for median age of shows with older audiences is 65 plus, and that Mr. OReillys audience falls into that category.)
 
So however you want to put it, its clearly the senior citizens.
 
Of course, that was in 2006. If the trend held, the number is probably getting even older.
 
posted by Dan Lewis
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
1.5 million viewers as well as a pay-cable television show is eking out a living? What planet are you on?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
The only other outlets that I can think of to come close to the NPR story are The Daily Show and The Colbert Report, which are more about humor than the news.  The scary thing is they generally provide more interesting / useful coverage than the news networks (often by lampooning the networks).
 
posted by Jason
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
http://www.talkers.com/main/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=17&Itemid=34
 
Though if that 1.5 million number is true, its doing better than Id expect.
 
FYI, this is funny:
 
http://www.kasperhauser.com/this_am_life.html
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
This American Life is not an NPR program.  It is produced by PRI (Public Radio International).
 
posted by Phil Mocek
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
There is additional advantage to reading in comparison with watching - you are under less influence of the author.  This is why you take contracts to home to read them alone - you can gather more intellectual resources for critical thinking when you free your mind from the image of the author.
 
posted by Zbigniew Lukasiak
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
That still doesnt answer the question over how the 270 million people in the US will get their news. This American Life is a great program, but it appeals to a minority audience: Those that have 1 hour to listen to a news program. How do we get the public, most of whom dont have much time, engaged once again with news? and interested in it? After visiting WV over the weekend I was surprised how many individuals I spoke to thought Obama was a muslim and had the same philosophy as Rev Wright. That doesnt suggest the media (of which I am one) is doing a good job.
 
posted by Paul Guinnessy
 on May 13, 2008 #
 
Phil Mocek, very good point.  I stand corrected.  What I should have been encouraging was donating to ones public radio station, not NPR specifically.
 
And Paul, I hate to say this, but while I largely agree with Aaron and others that our media can and should do a better job reporting the news I also think people need to take responsibility for their own education and enlightenment.   You can put delicious and nutritious food in front of folks, but if they still insist on eating cotton candy and slurpees, well
 
posted by Adam
 on May 13, 2008 #
 
Hi Aaron,
 
Great article on an important. I can understand your thoughts on why news seem indecipherable to so many. However, I would agree with some of the other commentators here to say that:
1) this is not a model that can be replicated enmass.
2) this is not the reason why newspaper/print media companies are performing poorly.
 
1) As others have stated above, everyday news is only able to provide daily developments in current issues. They are not able to reiterate the entire history everyday. When I was in highschool and first began reading the newspaper, I had a lot of difficulty since the type of information given is not conducive to the understanding by a first time reader. However, now, since I have a stronger knowledge base to reference from, I find I can last a week between newspaper reading the paper but still completely understand most current events. For the purposes of ongoing and protracted issues, daily developments can only be published piecemeal. However, I agree that a pervasive and complex event could be better explained by a Special report that speaks to the publics intelligence and background knowledge.
(Note: If you enjoy this type of reporting, may I recommend BBC News channel- up to the date news reports punctuated by indepth analyses of specific issues)
 
2) Print media, like many industries, underwent a giant transformation due to the advent of the internet. But content isnt the reason why companies suffered- Delivery was. Companies like Wall Street Journal and the one newspaper Buffet invested in (Chicago based I think) adapted to the internet quite well. It can further be said that Print Media companies had full advantage in using the internet. They were well capitalized, had the infrastructure and network, and many other barriers to entry to be first movers in this space. However, management was incapable of seizing this opportunity.
 
I conclude by saying that i agree with you in that our core audiences needs have changed. However, I would not surmise to think that more exhaustive content is a solution to the print media woes of today. What are your thoughts? Is there room for agreement between our views?
 
posted by Edward Marcus Lam
 on May 13, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 12, 2008
 
Title: Science or Philosophy?: Jon Elster and John Searle
 
As the name suggests, the social sciences have often seen themselves as an analogue or extension of the natural sciences and have from the beginning aspired to their successes. Like many who want to duplicate success they do not understand, social sciences has been obsessed with duplicating the form of the natural sciences and not its motivations. Just as rival music player manufacturers have tried to copy the look of the iPod without understanding why it takes that look, the social sciences have copied the structure of the natural sciences without understanding why they take that structure.
 
The greatest success of the natural sciences is undoubtedly the laws of physics. Here, an handful of simple equations can accurately predict the motion of a vast variety of everyday objects under common actions. Seeing this, social scientists have aspired to derive similar laws that predict the behavior of whole societies. (Others, meanwhile insist the entire project is impossible because the society will respond to the creation of the law, making the law invalid  reflexivity.)
 
But reflection upon the history of the natural sciences will see that this notion is insane. Physics did not develop thru attempts to discover the laws that explained all of motion. Instead, various kinds of motion (like falling objects) were described, rules for their behavior deduced, and commonalities in those rules discovered. Eventually it was the case that the commonalities were so great and the rules so few that a handful of laws could explain most of the phenomena, but this assumption was not made a priori.
 
Jon Elster argues that the social sciences should proceed in a similar way: various social phenomena should be described, the mechanisms that give rise to them explained, and the commonalities among mechanisms discovered. Most of his work consists of practicing social science in this way, with a few attempts at laying out a toolbox of these common mechanisms.
 
Modern social science is so split between attempts at grand law-like theories and modest essays of careful description that Elsters third way seems alien and hard to comprehend. But there is a clear model that social scientists can look to: analytical philosophy.
 
Analytical philosophers do not take as their task grand law-like explanations for the world. Instead, they set upon a particular piece of conception  language, free will, ethics  and try to discover its logical structure. In doing so they often develop tools they shared in common with other philosophical projects.
 
This similarity can perhaps be best seen in the work of the man who is Jon Elsters closest equivalent in the world of analytical philosophy, John Searle. In his career, Searle has addressed a number of topics: language, intentionality, consciousness, social reality, and rationality. Throughout he has taken has his task providing a clear description of the phenomena and explaining the pieces it consists of. And in explaining those pieces, he frequently develops tools that he reuses in his other explanations.
 
Take the notion of direction of fit. Searle argues that all statements have a direction of fit, which can be either up, down, both, or null. If we imagine (by convention) that statements float above the world pointing down at the things they represent, then statements like John and Jill are married, in which it is the job of the statement to change to accurately represent the world, have a downward direction of fit. By contrast, statements like I want to marry him, in which it is the world must change to match the statement, have an upward direction of fit.
 
This notion, which Searle and Austin developed for describing language, Searle later reused for describing mental states. Love, for example, has an upward direction of fit, belief downward, and joy null. And in my own everyday life, I have found the same tool useful in thinking about various phenomena Ive encountered.
 
Social scientists dont seem to read much philosophy. I suspect most of them see it as an alien culture consisting of, as Paul Graham put it, either highly technical stuff that doesnt matter much, or vague concatenations of abstractions their own authors didnt fully understand. But perhaps they should, because even if the technical stuff lacks interest (and considering some of the topics involved, Im skeptical that this is always the case), the tools, and the way theyre wielded, should be a lesson.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 12, 2008
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 11, 2008
 
Title: The Toolbox Does Not Shrink
 

 
For the past forty years, Jon Elster has attempted to explain things ranging from the emotions to technological change. The result is dozens of books (and even more papers) in three languages across four universities. And throughout, his work has not just been exemplary social science, but has always struggled with the question of what social science should be  what kinds of explanations are legitimate, which techniques should be used, and so on.
 
As he reaches his late sixties, it is understandable if he begins to think of his legacy. That certainly would help explain his latest book, Explaining Social Behavior: More Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences (Cambridge University Press, 2007), a 500-page masterpiece that I expect will be seen as the summation of a brilliant career.
 
Its a book unlike any other and, as a result, unless read from start to finish can seem bizarre, if only because one has little sense of what the book is trying to do. It is not a guidebook, or a textbook, or a piece of social science in itself. In short, it is nothing less than an attempt to summarize an idealized vision of the whole of social science in simple language.
 
The books foundational assumption (as implied by its title) is that the goal of social science is to discover explanations for social phenomena. It begins by describing what explanations are and discussing their different forms. But the bulk of the book consists of tools that can be used in explanations: emotions, norms, time discounting, weakness of will, magical thinking, cognitive dissonance, heuristics and biases, rationality, irrationality, neuroscience, evolution, externalities, game theory, pluralistic ignorance, informational cascades, collective action, cyclical preferences, institutions, etc.  in short, the entire toolkit of the social sciences.
 
Just as amazing as the breadth topics is the way in which theyre covered. Elster explains each phenomenon clearly and concisely, so that any educated reader can understand them with little effort, without ever sacrificing intellectual depth. His explanations are peppered with examples from an amazing variety of sources: ancient history, recent history, personal experience, the classics of social science (e.g. Tocqueville), the great philosophers (Montaigne, Pascal, Mill), and classic novelists (e.g. Proust). The result is a book which not just introduces readers to the discoveries of the social sciences but to the intellectual world as a whole. Bibliographical notes following each chapter as well as the conclusion provide a rich guide for further exploration.
 
And yet its not simply a compendium of interesting results in the social sciences, but attempts to defend a particular conception of what the social sciences should be. In the conclusion, Elster defends his notion of social science as the attempt to discover particular explanations for particular phenomena against the soft obscurantism of the literary theorists and the hard obscurantism of the economists. As part of this, he turns his back on the notion of rational-choice models being an explanation in themselves, noting that their many assumptions are in desperate need of empirical defense.
 
In response to an earlier draft of this review, Elster wrote Im glad you appreciate the details in my book, but youre missing the big picture, which is that there isnt any. Instead of trying to build a Grand Theory which explains all of social life, we should try to build explanations of particular phenomena from the nuts and bolts we have lying around. And even if a dominant explanation of a given event or episode is discarded and then resurrected, the building blocks or mechanisms at work in the discarding and resurrection remain. The repertory, or the size of the toolbox, does not shrink.
 
For anyone who cares about social science, Elster has done an amazing service in clearly describing the toolboxs contents and defending its importance.
 
This is the first post of Elster week.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 11, 2008
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: April 20, 2008
 
Title: Money and Control
 
I never give money to those people, she said. Theyre only going to spend it on drugs, anyway. And whats so wrong with that?, I wondered. I can see why one might want to discourage Harvard students from spending all their time getting stoned (although, I have to say, I dont see anyone doing that), but if your life is spent sitting outside, hungry, cold, and miserable, drugs seem like a pretty decent use of the money.
 
But, more importantly, since when is that your call to make? That you live in a nice house with a bulging wallet and he lives on the street is due to an enormous number of random factors that could just as easily have been reversed. And even if youre arrogant enough to believe youre a better person in some way  smarter, harder-working, more ambitious  since when does being better give you the right to tell other people how to live their lives? Is Tiger Woods allowed to just come along and take the chocolate out of your shopping cart at the supermarket?
 
It is a sad fact of reality that you have money and he has none and that, as a result, he needs the money to buy material goods. But no moral consequences can be derived from this. Just because history has given you the power to choose whether this person can acquire certain material goods doesnt give you the right to make that call.
 
Now its true, you dont have to give him money at all. Most dont. But if you feel that other people deserve to live a life without privation, at least let them choose how to live that life.
 
Perhaps an example closer to home will help. Remember when your father offered to help you buy a house if only you went back to school? That was the same thing  trying to use the fact that he had money and you didnt in order to get you to do what he wanted. For years, hed been trying to get you to go back to school; and you didnt, because it was your decision and you didnt want to. But then he realized he could use the money to control you. Remember how that chafed?
 
At the time you brushed it off as his money, his call. But dont you see how thats not true? Whether you go to school or not was never his call. And while its certainly within his rights to help you buy a house, using that to try to and control you was wrong. You deserve to make your own choices about your life  we all do.
 
Including that man there.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 20, 2008
 
Hi Aaron,
 
While I struggle with the practical implications of your thoughts here, I cant argue much with the logic behind them.
 
I wonder, who is talking about the relationship between the logic of our actions regarding society, and the effects of those action? Perhaps Im getting at this question: on what basis should we evaluate our actions re: society? Logic? Emotion? Pragmatism? Social Darwinism?
 
Thanks for sharing your Thoughts
 
Steve
 
posted by Steve Ivy
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Just because history has given you the power to choose whether this person can acquire certain material goods doesnt give you the right to make that call.
 
If Im paying for the material goods, I feel like I should have a certain amount of power over what goods are purchased.  I have a moral opposition to drugs, and so therefore I wont dispense money unless I know for certain it wont be used for drugs.  Subsequently, I dont give money to bums that are likely to use it for drugs.
 
When you ask other people for money without giving something in return, you necessarily give up some of your rights to privacy and the usage of that money.  See: Food stamps, etc.  The person giving the money isnt trying to control the person receiving it, theyre just trying to make the most effective (morally and economically) usage of their money.
 
posted by Erik Peterson
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
But your Dad has the right to refuse money if you dont go back to school, right?
 
And thus she has the right to refuse money to people whom will use it to buy drugs, right?
 
Freedom, eh?
 
posted by Brett
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Erik: Thanks for sharing your feelings, but do you have any justification for them? You are trying to control someone thru the use of your money. You may consider that control effective, but at what?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
That you live in a nice house with a bulging wallet and he lives on the street is due to an enormous number of random factors that could just as easily have been reversed. And even if youre arrogant enough to believe youre a better person in some way  smarter, harder-working, more ambitious  since when does being better give you the right to tell other people how to live their lives?
 
But thats not really true.  What you seem to be saying is that in effect people are not responsible for their actions.  Sure, there are a whole bunch of random inheritances I got from my family, including both genes, prenatal health, etc. as well as cultural endowments like being taught to elevate certain behaviors over others, reading, learning, etc. as well as social endowments by being upper middle class.  In so far as any success I have as a direct relationship to these things without any reflection upon my choices and behaviors what you say is true.  But while these things help, they are clearly not the only thing that matters.
 
My mom came to this country when she was in her teens not speaking the language from a small down which didnt have schooling past 5th grade and became a doctor at a time when Women Werent Doctors.  There is a moral difference between doing that and coming from a similar place and not doing that.  One is better than the other, and the reason that it is so is because of the effort and the choices that someone made.  If my mom didnt fight to achieve then it wouldnt have happened.  If she wasnt as smart as she was or had a different temperament or different genes or different parents than it wouldnt happen.   If she was a paranoid schizophrenic then it wouldnt happen.
 
But there still is very clearly a difference.  Somethings are in your control, and you are responsible.  There is a moral dimension, especially when things are more-or-less equal.  If your homeless man is a mentally healthy individual who came from opportunities than, frankly, hes an asshole.  But this example is contrived, because most of the homeless I see (I live in NYC so thats at least 5 before i get to the office every morning) basically should be in an institution where they are fed and sheltered because they are sick, either mental illness or PTSD or something which we are being heartless by letting them suffer on their own.
 
Not everything is in your control; but quite a lot is.  History is not what gives people power, it is a combination of their circumstances and what they do with those circumstances, and thats where some people are better than others.  And by better, I mean better at playing the hands that they were dealt.  And to push the cards analogy further, you see the same faces at the last table of the poker tournaments.  So even if the hands are random, as they are in the games, the way and the skilled with which they are player dominates the results.  Not any sort of random acts of history.
 
So you have proved that you are better at living your live as someone else.  Ok, what gives you the right to tell anyone else?  Well, thats not really the situation.  The other person is asking for money, which means that the other person is not in fact acting independently.  The right of control is given when the person asks.  If they didnt ask for anything, then there is no right.  The right basically stems from the fact that the person who has the money or is giving something away is obligated to act morally; they are responsible for their actions.  And if giving you money encourages you to do something immoral or wrong, like say killing yourself with drugs (I actually dont care about drugs but when you are in a liquor store watching a homeless guy buy thunderbird in nickels and dimes and the guy behind the counter says something about needing to have their medicine you wonder who those assholes are who enable them to wallow in the street rather than say housing and feeding them), well, you cant shirk the responsibilities of your action having consequences.  And thats where the control imperative comes from.
 
posted by Will
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Im not trying to control a person through money, Im trying to control my own money, which I work to earn.  I dont think Im unreasonable for trying to direct the flow of my own money.
 
I think you have a drastically different view on the ownership of money than I do.
 
posted by Erik Peterson
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
I guess the point is: until I give it away, it is still my money. So if I am going to invest in a human, Id prefer to do it in a way that doesnt lead to more self destruction. I give money to things like the local food bank, and other local city projects that. If folks are really hungry, they know where to go.
 
Another way to look at it: a friend is in need of some money. Lets say health problems took their toll, and he or she is in the middle of rebuilding their life. While, I would support them in getting some improved quality of life over just simply surviving, I would not gift them money if they could barely pay their rent, and they are out buying the latest and greatest iPhone and skipping off to LA.
 
Ill gladly give me money away to help folks survive, but otherwise my extra money is for MY luxury, not theirs. So, I guess it is a pecking order. Someone elses survival, should be more important than my luxury, but your luxury will rarely, if ever, trump mine.
 
posted by KiltBear
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Are you really helping someone by feeding their habit?
 
Heres an idea: if theres a restaurant or food shop not too far from where you are, ask the person if theyre hungry and offer to buy them lunch / dinner. If its cold outside a soup and sandwich, or a meatball sub, can help.
 
posted by David Magda
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
i think there are few things at play here:
 
there will always be poor people.
 
there is a difference between being broke and being poor.
 
i agree with aaron that we should help other people because they are people.
 
being a person, however, does not mean that you deserve anyones help. if anything, its the other way around: being a person means you have a responsibility to help other people.
 
helping other people does NOT ONLY mean giving them money.
 
therefore, i think we have a responsibility to help the poor (and occasionally the broke). how we decide to do it, however, is our freedom.
 
i have never turned down someone asking for help in my city. but then, ive never given them cash, either. i always buy them food, and sometimes will even eat a meal with them.
 
and aaron, i have to agree with Brett: your example was ill-conceived. when you are asking your dad for money, and he says you have to go back to school, he hasnt removed free will from the equation. you can refuse to go back to school, and he can refuse to give you money. he owes you nothing. and you arent actually controlled by him.
 
turn your equation around. when your son asks you for money, because hes in debt and doesnt have money for beer and prostituteswill you give it to him? and how much? and for how long? somehow it seems youd draw a line somewhere. at some point youll look at your kid and say get a job, im not supporting you anymore. is that controlling his life? or is that simply being an adult?
 
posted by nic
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
I never give money to those people, she said. Theyre only going to spend it on drugs, anyway. And whats so wrong with that?, I wondered.
 
Could you seriously give a defense of a homeless person begging 20 dollars over the course of a day and then spending it all on heroin as a sensible or good use of the time or money of any of the people involved.  Under what value system is that a good outcome?
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Can you seriously give a defense of a banking CEO giving himself a multi-million dollar salary and spending it on yachts as a sensible or good use of the time or money of any of the people involved? There are lots of things people do with money that are probably less than ideal, but I dont get to tell them how to live their lives.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
I think Mr. Baker asked a straightforward question and you completely dodged it.  Id love to know about a banking CEO that giv[es] himself a multi-million dollar salary but that is off-topic.
 
Is control such a bad thing?  Imposing control on some homeless people sounds like a great idea to many people.  At least let them confront their addictions/mental issues, which are the overwhelming problems confronting the homeless, before you let them continue their negative patterns under their free will.
 
What is so horrible about control in general?  Sure, there are a number of parties I would not want controlling me.  There is nothing immoral about subsidizing an activity with some expectations or strings attached.  If you disagree, I expect you would percieve everyone as immoral which you seem to anyway.
 
posted by Jeremy Corbett
 on April 21, 2008 #
 
I recently had a similar conversation with some friends.  Im kind of with Aaron on this oneI dont base my decision on what I think a beggar will use money for; I spend money on alcohol, so why shouldnt he?  My problem with beggars is that they arent producing anything valuable, so I dont think they deserve my money.
 
I dont give money to people who simply ask for money, but I will almost always drop a dollar in someones hat whos singing a good song.  I feel like hes earned it by lifting my spirit with a song.
 
posted by Kortina
 on April 21, 2008 #
 
(Wish I had read your last post before this one before I posted my comment on this post.)
 
posted by Kortina
 on April 21, 2008 #
 
Hmm.  I quite felt my dad was correct to say that sort of thing, while I feel differently about people who ask me for money around the courthouse.
 
I guess I felt my dad had some responsibility which meant some right to attempt to use moral suasion, and I trusted my dad.
 
I dont expect a guy who is asking me for money to trust me and I dont feel that responsible for him.
 
Ill have to think more.  Am I enabling or not?  I hope not, but I think about it.  Cant help myself though.  There is the hope it will help if I give money, just as when Ive donated time at shelters to serve food.  One hopes.
 
posted by Stephen M (Ethesis)
 on April 21, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
I live in Chicago and we have a newspaper that is sold by homeless people looking to get back on their feet.  I buy the paper weekly.
 
However, what would be the best gift to give to these folks?  Is it money, is it volunteering at a shelter?  How can we change the dynamic?  Should we?
 
posted by Ziad
 on April 23, 2008 #
 
what would be the best gift to give to these folks?
 
Why not give them all the gifts you can? Im not sure what day-to-day part-of-your-job interactions programmers have with the poor, I suspect its not much. As an officer in the Navy, many of my sailors families qualified for food stamps. They are a hardy bunch but often at risk of loosing their housing. They didnt have good role models, in fact they often were surrounded by horrible role models. Molestors, drunks, abandoners. Quitters, jailhouse thugs, and the mentally disabled. The mentally disabled may be good people, but theyre bad role models if for no other reason than they are simply not emotionally consistent, reliable, predictable.
 
As a medical student, Ive seen the poor at their lowest. The mentally disabled at their worst: lying, seductive, violent, desperate, confused, fractured  floridly psychotic they call it. One man gouged out his sisters eye for talking back to him while he was raving in the street. Hes schizoaffective. He didnt know. He sells himself as a male prostitute to get money, a trade he learned in jail. But his sister is now also traumatized for life, and her children will no doubt be scarred emotionally, desperately wary of men, mental illness, or both. Ive seen a 40-year-old man come in to the ER to look over his 73-year-old mother whos somnolent and bleeding internally from dead bowel, the arteries clamped off for hours by the vasoconstrictive effect of cocaine. Ive seen a former Senate staffer turned schizoaffective. Why? Chance. Dormant genetics. Not her fault. Struck down from the seat of power at 35.
 
The ones that break my heart are the vets. Id like to know how many scruffy middle-aged men on street corners with cardboard vet signs are actually vets. I suspect most of them are. These were perfectly healthy and intelligent people before something devastated them, mentally, physically, spiritually. Many are travellers: emotionally disturbed, never treated, they wore out their families and were abandoned by the ones they loved. Their wives abandoned them to care for their children and they simply couldnt care for an apparently permanently broken husband as well. They roam from bed to bed, city to city. They favor the grain cars on trains: the long bucket-like cars have welded reinforcements at the ends where the bucket wedges inward at the bottom. The reinforcements form a cave-like structure with a little porch.
 
But before they wandered, before they were abandoned, theyre wrecked psyches made them terrible role models for those children. Who then either sort it out or dont. The outcome probably depends most on the length of exposure.
 
Other vets were never abandoned by their families. They had no families. Unfit for duty, they were discharged and walked across the blue line on the curb, bag in hand. Too embarrassed or unable to go home, they wander.
 
Heroin is an opiate. It relieves pain. Its a favored drug of the poor. Cocaine and meth give the user a feeling of strength, power. The power to meet their fathers expectations. The power to turn the next trick so at least theyll make the rent. Until the money gets spent on the next hit. Alcohol, its a little liquid courage to make a bold step and talk to the girl. We all experience a degree of pleasure in overcoming that little challenge. Unfortunately, it seems a number of alcoholics may actually derive too much pleasure, too much dopamine. They can experience pleasure an order of magnitude greater than most of us. They dont know that. You dont know that. But they quickly associate the liquid courage with the intense pleasurable dopamine payoff, and take to it like fish, with all the expected terrible other consequences.
 
Somewhere in society there is a shift from goods begetting goods to problems begetting problems. The people have so many problems, theres no point in fixing the first one, like a car with too many dents to fix. Children who are born into these broken homes and escape are in a very real way lucky: the random events in their lives added up to shape their decision-making process and early actions in such a way that they accidentally fall across the divide and begin to be net contributors. It is little wonder some of them are revolted by their past and rail against poverty and the poor work ethic of the poor. But its hard to appreciate the flip-side: that theyre the one car that got out of the wrecker derby unscathed. The rest are too dented.
 
Keep in mind, people dont generally live on the street for years. Not truly on the street. Those who run out their welcome at every half-way house, every shelter, they die.
 
On the flip side, there is also a significant value to each of us taking action. In time, money, quantity, quality, adding something to these peoples lives. People turn themselves around. They do. Believe it or not, beggars may be on their way up. These are people who, through mental illness, lack of education, lack of mental capacity, or their own past poor choices are likely living moment to moment. Theyve been forced to admit, probably in the last minute, and maybe 60 times in the last hour, that they have nothing and no way of bootstrapping themselves to even the faintest of goals without some minimum amount of money. At that moment, the moment you are before them, theyre not getting high enough to do the next deed. Theyre not sleeping in the alley. Theyre not beating their kids (those are probably long gone). They might be resigned, they might have been playing trumpet yesterday until they woke up this morning and found their trumpet stolen. In that moment, Ill just about garuntee their plan is not to buy drugs or alcohol or anything except a cab to their sons house to apologize, or to the ER to get paracentesis for their hepatitis. Or food. But they probably are practical and with it enough to realize that you might have cash, but you probably dont have a can of Campbells in your car. And they really dont want anyone throwing a can of Campbell at them. The coins and their feet hurt plenty enough. They might be asking for money, but in truth theyre asking for something. Anything. Please.
 
What value system seriously argues against charity?
 
Give to poor. There but for the grace of chance go you.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on April 23, 2008 #
 
Just because history has given you the power to choose whether this person can acquire certain material goods doesnt give you the right to make that call.
 
Would I be right in generalizing your comment to be, It is immoral to use power to influence people?
 
Or is that too general?
 
posted by Gordon McNutt
 on May  8, 2008 #
 
Your post reads like I should have to give the man money (because you say so, effectively).  Now whos being controlling?  Youre entitled to your opinion as much as the next guy.  However, when your opinion is no more than, I think you ought to give money to street people, I think you should expect flack.
 
Tell you what  Go find a homeless person who cant read, and teach them to read.  Because I said so.  No, really.  You can read, so what right do you have to let them stew in their illiteracy?  And not just that one illiterate person you passed this morning  you (personally) have to teach all of them, because they all need it.
 
In response to Erik, you wrote, You /are/ trying to control someone thru the use of your money.  And what, exactly, are you trying to do, through the use of your blog?  Control others, Id wager.
 
posted by Random Passerby
 on May 10, 2008 #
 
I usually dont give money to anyone that I dont know.  I dont give money to charities.  Through my life I usually havent had a lot of money to give money to help street beggars, although sometimes it tugs your heart strings to see them.  And from the statistics, most people a NOT mentally handicapped or drugged up.  What they are is mothers with little children, veterans, people like you and I who were doing just fine one day and the next they lost the job, their marriage, their health, their house.  What I do, if someone is in distress, is to lend a hand.  I usually help someone (even a stranger) who is stranded with a flat tire.  I have, several times, given a ride to a hitch hiker.  I usually open the door for the person behind me.  If a someone is depressed or has lost loved one, I linger a little to see if they need someone to listen.  If a person is been overwhelmed, I have babysat for an afternoon or helped clean their house.  If someone is beaten from a spouse, I listen to them and offer some counsel, or a place to stay if they seem they need that.  One time a coworker was in fear of his job, so I went to the boss to try to keep his job (didnt work).  Another person, who was in pain, needed me to drive her to the doctor.  I payed for the doctors bill because he wouldnt see her without payment.  So far, the people that I have known, most of them didnt seem to want handouts, they just want some kindly and thoughtful advice, a job, someone to talk to, a way to make it, a little respect.  Everything you do has an effect on someone else.
 
posted by kathy
 on June  8, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: April 20, 2008
 
Title: Money and Worth
 
The streets of San Francisco are lined with poor people looking for a
little spare change. Many different strategies are tried  some just
shake a jar, others call for help, some make specific small requests,
and a fellow I saw today just kept sunnily repeating a nickel and a
smile will last a long while in an endearing tone. Others, however, try
to earn their keep  playing music, doing tricks, selling special
papers like Spare Change.
 
I have a strong urge to help out the first group, those who simply ask,
but helping the second has always struck me as odd. People tell me that
its better if the poor receive their money by doing work, because it
lets them retain some dignity, but Ive never quite bought that. After
all, how much dignity do you get when your income comes from people
patronizingly pretending to buy a newspaper specially created for this
ruse?
 
But theres a much more serious problem with only giving the poor money
for doing things. It encourages them to think their worth as a person is
defined by their success in the capitalist economy.
 
Now there is a grain of truth to this delusion. There are many useful
jobs for which society can compensate you. (Although even that, frankly,
requires a level of non-useful skill at fitting into the general
capitalist system.) But thats about it. There are many useful jobs that
society doesnt compensate well. There are many useful people who cant
do any of those jobs because society never trained them or gave them the
opportunities required. And even if, perchance, there existed someone
who cannot and even with training and opportunity could not do anything
useful, it seems clear to me that their simple existence as a human
being endows them with some inalienable value. (If human beings didnt
have value, then we would have no one to do useful things for.)
 
People on the street dont deserve our money because they can pretend to
do certain menial jobs. Nor should their sense of dignity be bound up in 
doing them. Instead they, like everyone else, deserve our money because
they are people and if we cannot care for other people, then we have
precious little else.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 20, 2008
 
Thank you for this post.  This is an amazingly lucid and compassionate exploration of human values, dignity and our ways of caring for each other.
 
posted by Amy
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
I completely agree that the Street Spirit / Spare Change delusion doesnt really help anyone, and that it is simply better to help a fellow denizen out of the goodness of the act.
 
Lets not throw this  upon the capitalist pyre just yet.  Having a reason to get up in the morning and a way to contribute to society, whether for financial, social or personal gain, to feel that you matter in some way, to some one,  is all weve really got, so the real question is how to you provide baseline subsistence so people dont have to make the motions of contribution and not require, but rather encourage a rich, active, not necessarily capitalist life.
 
Ive got no answers.
 
posted by Dan
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
People dont deserve our money. Human beings, however, do deserve our respect as human beings. Equating respect with giving them money is, if I am reading this entry correctly, your mistake.
 
I think the direction your thoughts take on this sound very much what I understand co-dependence to be. Most peoples situations are of their own making. If you insist that there is now way you can know what they have been through, I would half agree with you, but I would also point out that assuming that they have no control over their lives is condescending and says how little you think of them.
 
They deserve a chance, they deserve a break, they deserve opportunity, they deserve real hope that can actually bear(bare?) success. Unfortunately, if handouts to someone in your home-town compares to the global handouts to places like Africa, I think the current zeitgeist is that we are learning that handouts of any sort tend to be destructive.
 
posted by KiltBear
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
heres the problem:
 
weve made this a moral discussion.
 
it is well within your moral rights to simply donate money to people on the street without expecting anything in return.
 
and it is certainly a moral thing to recognize the innate value in every human being.
 
but it is impractical to start assuming that just because the action is moral, means that you have to do it all the time.
 
if you made it mandatory for yourself to walk through the city each evening and gave $20 to every beggar you saw, youd be making a moral decision. and a positive one at that.
 
but how long do you think youd survive on what you had left? my guess is youd end up begging on the street yourself before too long. how does that help them, really?
 
i think giving money to the poor is good. but i think there are other things that can be done that are even better: where i live, i sometimes help out RIFA, a charity that offers free computer classes, job placement services, a food bank, temporary lodging, and a host of other services aimed directly at helping people lift themselves out of poverty.
 
maybe thats fanatically capitalistic of them.
 
or maybe theres more to helping the poor than tossing cash at them.
 
posted by nic
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Aaron, you write like someone who has been much loved in his life.
 
This is, sadly, more the exception than the rule.
 
if we cannot care for other people, then we have precious little else.
 
Thats a laudable sentiment, but it doesnt pay the rent, buy food, get medical care, etc.
 
Its also unconvincing to anyone who isnt already convinced (to a good approximation).
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
I recently spent some time in San Francisco.  I was amazed at the number of people giving money to beggars.  I even saw a man give his daughter a dollar bill to take to the panhandler to put in his hat.
 
In London this is much less common.  Although it does still happen (otherwise we wouldnt have beggars).
 
Westminster City Council and The Big Issue (our very successful equivalent of Spare Change) recently ran a large advertising campaign asking Londoners not to give money to homeless people begging on the street 
 
Are you killing with kindness?  The money you give to those who beg may actually keep them on the streets. In some cases you may be helping them buy drugs that could kill them.  http://www.killingwithkindness.com/
 
I think the idea of the Big Issue (and Spare Change?) is that they vet sellers of the paper in some way so that you can be a lot more sure that your contribution is  constructive (as long as you make sure you are buying from a badged vendor).
 
On a personal note I havent given any money to beggars since I gave five pounds to a young man with a convincing line about needing to get into a hostel for the night whom I saw shooting up later the same night.
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Equating respect with giving them money is, if I am reading this entry correctly, your mistake.
 
Thats pretty much what I was thinking.
 
Id say another mistake is thinking theres anything simple about asking for money. It takes a lot of persuasive skill to convince people to give. Whether its asking or singing, youre rewarding a performance either way. The former group is just so talented at performing that it looks effortless to you.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Aaron says:
 
if we cannot care for other people, then we have precious little else.
 
Seth follows:
 
Thats a laudable sentiment, but it doesnt pay the rent, buy food, get medical care, etc.
 
Not only is Aarons statement laudable, it is common sense. Are you saying, Seth, that if we care for societys most destitute, we all lose?
 
posted by Peter Rock
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
I think that simply giving money to people on the street is not the best use of resources.  Gifts and other sporadic donations to homeless/jobless folks, regardless of need, doesnt seem to address the structural issues that put them on the street in the first place.  As mentioned, the sporadic and completely undependable frequency/quantity doesnt leave much room for Tomorrow, only Now.
What concerns me is that if we enable these individuals to remain on the street, how do we move them from the street to a self-sufficient/supported lifestyle?
 
That isnt to say, Epic Fail because they havent succeeded in the capilatlist economy and therefore should be ignored, or allowed to freeze in the street [I suppose that isnt such a problem in San Fran as Toronto?].
 
Resources, which are most likely hard to find, or already stretched to the limit, are, in my opinion, a better use of the money which may otherwise end up in the hands of street beggars; food programs, accessible housing, out of the cold [or the equiv. for you tropical folk], job search/creation services, and many more.
 
posted by Chad
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Chad says:
 
Gifts and other sporadic donations to homeless/jobless folks, regardless of need, doesnt seem to address the structural issues that put them on the street in the first place.
 
I agree though while structural solutions are absent, I see nothing wrong with sporadic giving - even if the receiver sometimes puts the gift to unproductive use.
 
posted by Peter Rock
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Chad: Does anyone actually say Hmm, I could give some spare change to this fellow, or I could donate it to a nonprofit working to solve the structural problems that cause homelessness? I doubt it. I think most people could easily do both.
 
That said, Id love to hear recommendations for San Francisco and Boston groups addressing structual causes of homelessness to donate to.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Minor nit Aaron. The poor creates IMHO negative images. I was strafed by a blind guy for talking about the blind as a generic group. We are people, who happen to be blind, sort of puts the emphasis where it should be. People first.
 
Funny how you are one of the clever doesnt work, yet, hes one of the poor does. Derogatory? Im not sure.
 
Thoughtful post though.
 
posted by Dave Pawson
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Peter: Im saying that while homilies are fine, they also are very limited. While it is not wrong to preach them, it also is not all that productive either. Many people go around saying some variant of The best society is when everyone acts their best.
Okay, right. But theres very many local incentives for people to be selfish bastards. Now what?
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on April 21, 2008 #
 
Make no mistake, you are advocating violence here. People who think they have a right to take my money and give it to others, would best be prepared to eat lead.
 
posted by Jim
 on April 23, 2008 #
 
Aaron: not sure what meets your definition of addressing structual causes of homelessness, but I can say that Womens Lunch Place, in Boston, does a great job of providing resources for specific homeless women to get back on their feet, and would make good use of any donations.
 
http://womenslunchplace.org
 
posted by Joe
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

====================================================
Date: July 21, 2008
 
Title: The Percentage Fallacy
 
Theres one bit of irrationality that seems like it ought to be in behavioral economics introduction but mysteriously isnt. For lack of a better term, lets call it the percentage fallacy. The idea is simple:
 
One day I find I need a blender. I see a particularly nice one at the store for $40, so I purchase it and head home. But on the way home, I see the exact same blender on sale at a different store for $20. Now I feel ripped off, so I drive back to the first store, return the blender, drive back to the second store, and buy it for $20.
 
The next day I find I need a laptop. I see a particularly nice one at the store for $2500, so I purchase it and head home. But on the way home, I see the exact same laptop for $2480. Pff, well, its only $20, I say, and continue home with the original laptop.
 
Im sure all of you have done something similar  maybe the issue wasnt having to return something, but spending more time looking for a cheaper model, or fiddling with coupons and rebates, or buying something of inferior quality. But the basic point is consistent: well do things to save 50% that wed never do to save 1%.
 
At first this almost seems rational  of course were going to do more to save more money! But you arent saving more money. With both the blender and the laptop, you have the chance to save $20. Either way, youre going to have another twenty in your pocket, which you can spend on exactly the same things later on. Yet we behave differently depending on whether we got that twenty by skimping on a small purchase or skimping on a big one. Rationally, if driving back to the store isnt worth $20 when youre buying a laptop, it isnt worth $20 when youre buying a blender.
 
On the other hand, dont those small savings tend to add up after a while? If you start blowing $20 every time you buy a trinket, youre soon going to be out of disposable income. Meanwhile, spending several thousand dollars is much rarer, so isnt it OK to slack off a bit on such occasions?
 
If we work to save 50% on everything, big or small, thats the equivalent of saving 50% of our money altogether. Whereas if we only try to save fixed amounts on every purchase, how much we save is dependent on how many things we buy.
 
So which is the real irrationality? Im not entirely sure of the answer.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 21, 2008
 
Just wanted to say this reminds me of Why Smart People Make Big Money Mistakes And How To Correct Them by Belsky & Gilovich. It was an entertaining read.
 
posted by Stan
 on July 21, 2008 #
 
This is, or is related to, scope insensitivity:
 
http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/05/scope_insensiti.html
 
posted by Aaron
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
This is covered in behavioural economics. For example, see Predictably Irrational (http://www.amazon.com/gp/reader/006135323X/ or http://openlibrary.org/b/OL9952510M) where Dan Ariely calls it the problem of relativity using an example about pens and suits (p. 19-20).
 
posted by Alex
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
Im not sure that the kind of person who will spend $2500 on a laptop is the same as the kind of person who would return the $40 blender.
 
Im sure there are other analogies which point out this behavior, but I dont think the blender one is realistic.
 
posted by Anthony
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
Isnt there another angle to this? Assuming that the market rate should fairly be the point of best compromise between the lowest a seller will accept and the highest a buyer is prepared to spend, its perceived as important not to support someone charging 200% of the market rate, but significantly less important that someone charging less than 1% above the market rate gets away with it. How dare they charge me $40 for a $20 blender? bears no real comparison to So they charged me $2500 for a $2480 laptop? Wooo. Again, if its a question of principle then the response in one sense should be the same - thats unfair, Im going to sort it out - but this way round, the percentage does seem to matter, whether its $20 or $2000.
 
posted by Igor Clark
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
I think the driving force is the need to not look/feel like an idiot. Buying something at twice the normal price leaves people with the same amount of feeling ripped off, almost regardless of the amount of money that they lost.
 
It then varies how much emphasis people put on not looking like fools vs. saving actual money.  Those whore poor probably think more about the dollars.
 
posted by Mr
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
Maybe people dont return the laptop because buying or returning a laptop usually involves a bit more paperwork/time, since it is a big ticket item.  Also, if you accidentally drop the blender on the way into the store, youre out $40, while if you drop the laptop, youre out $2500.
 
posted by Aaron
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
I personally when doing financial computation put everything into dollars/year. In the above example, both would appear as $20, and I would act accordingly. The reasons for the year, is for comparing reoccurring bills such as cell phones. Add all the costs up, then divide it by the terms of the contract. This way, Im always comparing in like terms.
 
posted by Shawn
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
You might also consider the long term.  A 1% variation of prices between stores is to be expect, but a 50% variation is not, regardless of the price of the item.  One cant put a dollar amount on the variation of prices between goods at different stores for any arbitrary goods; if blenders vary by $20 in price in a town, its unreasonable to expect laptops or cars to vary by the same amount.
 
So if you think in macroscopic terms, we would like a strategy to execute consistently over our lifetimes, for all goods.  If we hit 5 stores on the way home, we cant keep exchanging the item every time we see a 1% variation in the price of a good.  A 50% variation, since its so uncommon, would be worth the effort, since its unlikely to be repeated.
 
I agree with your reasoning in general, Im just thinking of a possible explanation for why people behave this way.
 
posted by enginerd
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
If youre not broke, who really gives a crap?
 
posted by surebutt
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
Did you know that 40% of people are good at understanding percentages, but 70% are bad at it?
 
posted by MathGuy
 on July 22, 2008 #
 
This post reminds me of the book Predictably Irrational by Dan Ariely. Its pop economics but a very good read for intellectuals alike.
 
posted by Ron
 on July 25, 2008 #
 
posted by 
 on July 26, 2008 #
 
There are hidden qualities to the place you purchase an item.  For instance, people typically find (or at least imagine) that higher-priced stores give better service, are more trustworthy, etc.  A higher quality store might be worth 10% of the purchase price.  So, if you spend $22 vs $20 on the blender, you can at least imagine its a wash.  But 100% markup is more than you can ignore.  So then you decide if the effort is worth $20.  For a laptop you might need $2750 vs $2500 before you consider whether the effort is worth the money.
 
Of course there isnt a specific cutoff, so its a bit more vague than this.  And of course higher prices dont always mean a better quality (where quality is customer service, the chance of fraud, the ability to return the item in the future, etc).
 
posted by Ian Bicking
 on July 27, 2008 #
 
Isnt the rational thing to do to judge how long it takes to return the item against the value of your time (judged by the next-best alternative), and if you come out ahead, then to do it, regardless of percentages?
 
I try to think this way, but its hard to fight that feeling of being ripped off when you see a large percentage difference.
 
I also think that when you make a high value purchase, youre in a different thinking mode.
When Im purchasing things in the sub $50 range, Im thinking in terms of how many coffees or books Im giving up. When Im purchasing things in the 1000+ plus range, Im thinking in terms of computers or cars.
 
$20 in the first sense feels like two weeks worth of coffee. $20 in the second sense feels like just some nominal percent of a laptop, so it holds less value until I change purchasing modes.
 
posted by Tim Showers
 on August  6, 2008 #
 
Umm Late to the party here, but I dont get it. If we assume one buys $40 items every week, but buys $2,500 items only once or twice a year, its pretty obvious why it would be a bad idea to get into the habit of letting oneself get ripped off $20 on a $40 item - youll go broke in a hurry.
 
An analogy: Most people will splurge on (dinner, tickets) when on vacation, but not when not. Why? Because their budgets can tolerate a small deviation. But if they begin out-of-budget splurging every week of the year, their budgets will crumble.
 
Its not a fallacy at all. Its about forming good habits. Its a good habit to demand a refund on a 50% overpayment, and probably a bad habit to start haggling over 1% differences.
 
posted by Percy
 on August 19, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June 30, 2008
 
Title: Capital and its Complements: A Summary
 
The following is a non-technical summary of Brad DeLongs May 2008 paper Capital and Its Complements.
 
Adam Smith explained that in all countries with security of property and tolerable administration of justice citizens would spend all their money (capital), either on consumption or investment, causing the countrys economy to grow. After some contention, later economic studies tended to bare this out: a shortage of capital wasnt always the bottleneck, but when it was, removing it could lead to extraordinarily rapid growth.
 
The problem for poor countries is that, because of high mortality rates (which require more children to have some survive) and low educational levels (which mean those children can find productive employment quickly), they have high population growth and thus low capital-to-labor ratios. Worse, trade allows you to spend your money buying manufactured goods from overseas, for which you have only your very cheap labor to provide in return. The result is that it requires an enormous amount of domestic investment to improve capital-to-labor ratios.
 
And so rich country economists made the neoliberal bet on behalf of poor countries: they hoped that loosening restrictions on international capital flows would send capital rushing in to poor countries and build their economies, the same way that Great Britains massive investment in a young United States (in 1913 Britains foreign assets equaled 60% of its domestic capital stock) built up that country.
 
But what ended up happening was exactly the opposite. Yes, NAFTA led US companies to invest the $20 to $30 billion a year on manufacturing in Mexico that its boosters predicted, but that investment was more than outweighed by the $30 to $40 billion a year fleeing the country from Mexicos wealthy wanting to invest it in the United States. Why? In part because the US was more politically stable, and thus a safer investment climate. And in part because the US treats its own workers so poorly  with productivity rising 35% since 2000 while real wages remain flat  it provides an excellent investment opportunity.
 
But meanwhile, all this investment in the US was dwarfed by the Chinese acquisition of our debt (and thus the political risk it represents). China needed to do this, since US purchase of their exports is the only thing funding the manufacturing-led industrialization of a massive portion of their economy; there would be massive dislocation if that funding dried up.
 
Recognition of these facts came slowly. First, Larry Summers said it was our unsustainable current account deficit. (That was the 1990s; today that deficit is four times as large.) Later, economists thought it must have been our large budget deficits. Then they began thinking it was the run-up in housing prices. But that, it is now clear to most economists, was the result of a bubble. And yet the flow of capital to the US continues. But, perhaps even more frighteningly, it could stop at any moment.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 30, 2008
 
ncv0ZD  erdphcoxrkgn, [url=http://vtrgqmwzzcdr.com/]vtrgqmwzzcdr[/url], [link=http://hdrdtjtisjaw.com/]hdrdtjtisjaw[/link], http://xsfumzwejteq.com/
 
posted by zizybgb
 on July  7, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June 19, 2008
 
Title: Last Goodbyes
 
Its minutes to midnight and Im hurriedly packing. Early tomorrow morning I catch a flight to Boston and start my new life. I havent really gotten much of a chance to pack until now, because Ive spent the past few days in a rush of meetings, getting in my last goodbyes for everyone I know in San Francisco.
 
Its been great seeing everyone, but like most locals, theyre all puzzled as to why Im leaving. Ive been struggling to explain why. When I say the weather, everyone just laughs. When I say San Francisco is too loud, they start arguing. When I say its the people, they tell me to find a better group of friends.
 
And the thing is, theyre right. Its none of these. Ive been spectacularly unable to articulate it, but the real answer is simpler and more prosaic. And now, after great thought and struggle, I realize the answer is simply this: Cambridge is the only place thats ever felt like home. Its that simple. And when you put it that way, its clear why I have to go.
 
So goodbye Stanford, goodbye Palo Alto; goodbye south bay, goodbye peninsula; goodbye Change Congress, goodbye Creative Commons; goodbye Mission, goodbye SOMA; goodbye friends, goodbye loved ones; goodbye San Francisco, home to everyone Ive ever loved. Youll always have my heart.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 19, 2008
 
Bye, Aaron.  I feel the same way about New Mexico, sigh.
 
posted by joe
 on June 19, 2008 #
 
That, my friend, is an un-arguable point. Home is home. And whatever and wherever you feel it, enjoy it. Well miss youbut undoubtedly throw an internet tether around you now and again.
 
Cheers and safe travels!
 
posted by Japhet
 on June 19, 2008 #
 
While one cant argue with your feelings, I still think moving from sunny San Francisco to miserable-weather Cambridge, is crazy. You cant go home again, as home is a moment in time.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on June 20, 2008 #
 
its understandable. for all the back and forth on the merits of this place and that, it was when you told me that it felt like home i stopped arguing. well, about what you should do, anyway.
 
posted by q
 on June 22, 2008 #
 
Welcome back. Im glad to hear you had such a positive experience here.  Hope you you keep that warm fuzzy feeling as you settle down, reconnect with the scene, develop a strong local network, and realize what a bunch of a-holes we are.  (BTW, my one-word response to complaints about New England weather: Iowa.)
 
posted by sierra
 on July  3, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June 19, 2008
 
Title: Scenes
 
God, Im so sick of this stuff. Cant we just go home? she wines. Jesus, I say, would it kill you to go one more place? Its been a long hot day in strange, busy New York City, and were not exactly at our best. In fact, the combination of heat and exhaustion has turned our love bitter, brought on the darkness and recriminations. Its at moments like these, the dark depths of a relationship, that you wonder how things could ever work. As we walk down the steps we hear a subway car approach. We accelerate, running to catch it. Its doors open. Were moving faster now, pushing our way through the bustle of Manhattanites to make it. The bell sounds and I jump inside and hear the doors whoosh closed behind me. I spin around only to see her trapped on the other side of the glass. I put my hand up to it, but the train accelerates and shes left standing there, just another face in the crowd.
 
Hey, want to see the game? Want a ticket to the Giants game? I do not, in fact, want to see the game  this or any other game. I hate sports. Yet the scalpers, apparently unaware of this, insist on trying to sell me one. Thats what I get for walking near the ballpark, I guess. As I curse my choice of scenery, a cop pulls up. He lowers his window and leans out toward the scalper. The scalper hands him a ticket and the cop speeds off. But he didnt pay! a man in a suit walking by complains. Cops get a special deal, explain the scalper. The man in the suit laughs and marvels at the scene.
 
Its weird being back at Stanford in the summer. Everythings so empty, nobodys around. Well, not nobody  there seems to be some action near the main quad. There are drum kits spread around and golf carts and purple uniforms lying about. But most of all, there are people  a bunch of students just standing around awkwardly. Im about to ask one of them whats going on when a bell rings and a voice shouts Background! Suddenly all the students snap to attention, begin walking in perfect lines with bookbags slung over their shoulder, bicycles ridden in perfect formation. These arent students at all, I realize with a lurch  theyre extras. Its disconcerting. A police guard is at the side, keeping kids from running over the camera crew. I ask her what theyre filming. Disneys High School Musical, she says quickly, trying to keep a student from cycling over the directors cart.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 19, 2008
 
Wow, I like the format. If a short story is like video, these are like photographs. Well done.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on June 19, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June 16, 2008
 
Title: Moving On
 
In November 2006, I moved to San Francisco because I had to: my company got acquired and us moving out was a condition of the agreement. It was the first time Id ever actually lived in San Francisco, as opposed to just visiting, and I quickly realized that although it was a fun place to visit, I couldnt stand living here.
 
Even after all this time, I cant really put my finger on what it is I dont like  in fact, I suspect its probably harder for me now to explain it than it was when I first came here. The first thing that comes to mind is how loud the city is. I want a place where I can live quietly and focus on my work; but San Francisco is filled with distractions. There are always crews tearing up the street, trains that are delayed, buses that have broken down, homeless people begging, friends having parties, and so on. Its impossible to concentrate and without my concentration, I feel less like me.
 
The other big problem is that San Francisco is fairly shallow. When I go to coffee shops or restaurants I cant avoid people talking about load balancers or databases. The conversations are boring and obsessed with technical trivia, or worse, business antics. I dont see people reading books  even at the library, all the people are in line for the computer terminals or the DVD rack  and people at parties seem uninterested in intellectual conversation.
 
And so Im moving back to Cambridge, Massachusetts  Harvard Square in particular, the one place Ive ever been to that brings a special delight to my eyes, that warms my heart just to see. Surrounded by Harvard and MIT and Tufts and BC and BU and on and on its a city of thinking and of books, of quiet contemplation and peaceful concentration. And it has actual weather, with real snow and seasons and everything, not this time-stands-still sun that San Francisco insists upon.
 
I miss Boston; Im excited to go back.
 
But Im also sad to leave my responsibilities in San Francisco. One of which Id particularly like your help with. Ive been honored and overjoyed to help Lawrence Lessig get his Change Congress project off the ground. If you havent heard, hes trying to build a national movement to get the corruption out of Congress; to pass public financing of public elections, earmark reform, and other pressing concerns.
 
But they need a full-time day-to-day tech organizer. Someone who knows how to blog and who the bloggers are and can keep them in touch with the community. Someone who knows enough about technology to know the tools that can be built and should be. And someone with enough drive and talent to make sure those things get built. Its a dreamy job and I hope theres someone out there who will take it from me. A more formal write-up is on the Change Congress blog.
 
Thanks for everything.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 16, 2008
 
Congrats on your move. I was just in Harvard Square a few days ago and enjoyed my short time walking around the area.
 
I will say, though, that while I was there, my ride on the T was delayed, some street musicians were playing loud Bob Dylan covers and, yes, I even witnessed some homeless people begging. I guess some things about city life are the same wherever you go.
 
posted by Adrian Holovaty
 on June 16, 2008 #
 
Aaronno offense, but lighten up, man! Cities everywhere, even Cambridge, are loud and annoying and have beggars; people will always, even in Cambridge, disappoint and be lower-brow than you wish. I find aspects of San Francisco a bit tedious myself, but your analysis is superficial. Holing yourself up in an academic cocoon is just as selfish and self-enthralled as the database load balancers you mock. Cant you see the contradiction in your engagement through Change Congress and your, frankly, whiny rejectionism? And in your yearning for the real seasons of Boston while at the same time seeking some notion urban purity?
 
posted by Paul Smith
 on June 16, 2008 #
 
In my defense, my sense of San Franciscos annoyances may be slightly skewed by the fact that I presently have A FRIGGIN JACKHAMMER OUTSIDE MY WINDOW THAT WILL NOT STOP GORRAMIT.
 
Sorry, just had to get that off my chest.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on June 16, 2008 #
 
You & I established within 5 minutes of meeting that we have opposite city preferences. You were interested in Philly and I hated every minute there, and I even hated the parts that you liked. Im happily in SF, and you were not so.
 
I am pretty sure, in retrospect, that my problem with Philly was that I didnt figure it out. That is not to say that I should have stayed in Philly & figured it out. If I had, I may have loved it there. But leaving was a much quicker route to the things I wanted.
 
I think I am trying to say Yes, dot-commers can be irritating, but please dont insult my city.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on June 16, 2008 #
 
Interesting post, Aaron. Ive lived in both places, San Francisco now for almost 5 years, and Cambridge (in various places around Harvard Square) for several years previously. I do miss Cambridge a little bitand can relate to your experiences in both places. That being said, though, I do have some thoughts
 
I think that you can surround yourself with the things you like to be around wherever you live-well, at least specifically in these two places. It can more or less difficult in some areas, but it can be done. Its taken me a long time to find my niche in SF- people I can relate to, and friends-rather than acquaintances. I think I fell into the trap of passively looking for the things I craved, instead of proactively finding them & taking a leap of faith every now and then.
 
I think SF is full of a lot of people that are searching for this niche, in fact, I think thats part of the attraction-you can find whatever youre looking for here. But, it can sometimes take some time. Its not a college town, like Cambridge/Boston-its a post college playpen.
 
And-no comment on the weather.
 
posted by Scot Federman
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
Yay!  We will be glad to have you back!  And while I have never been to SF, my wife has and, much to her consternation, found she greatly disliked it, and for much the same reasons you stated.
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
Welcome back to Cambridge. I definitely understand the contrast between San Francisco and Cambridge; I find it really hard to explain to my fellow students that I actually enjoy New England and that I cant stand spending long periods of time in California.
 
With your move back to Cambridge, what are you going to be focusing your energy on? Im curious to hear about the latest-and-greatest that you have planned, though Im sure it will be documented here on your blog in due time.
 
I dont know if you remember, but we sat down for lunch back in the summer of 2005 in Cambridge - perhaps it would be interesting to have lunch together again now, 3 years and two cities later?
 
Quentin
 
posted by Quentin Smith
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
The shallowness is an intriguing point. Doesnt this feeling mostly arise with things that can be considered mainstream, or in places that are much-hyped?
 
Love SF with all of my heart, though. And now feel I might want to visit Boston at some point too.
 
posted by Tommi
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
Hey Aaron!  Too bad to hear that youre leaving San Francisco.. I hear your criticism though, and I grew up in this city.  I think SF can be very shallow, but it depends on who you know and where you spend your time.  The male dominated, startup-filled cafes in the Mission are definitely annoying at times.. its ironic that this incredible place with such diverse projects and brilliance living within it can produce such a predictable overall, wonky culture sometimes.
 
Anyway, good for you for following your gut.  Your post sounds like Paul Grahams post about what cities tell you:
http://www.paulgraham.com/cities.html
 
When are you leaving?  We should get dinner again before you head off
 
posted by Tristan
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
Have you considered a shorter move and a change of crowd? The people to who read books and care about things seem to live in Oakland.
 
posted by Michal Migurski
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
Hey!
 
Itll be good to have you back round here.
 
posted by Mark Bernstein
 on June 17, 2008 #
 
I have also lived in both Cambridge (Porter Sq Harvard Sq was too loud ;) and the Bay Area. I find that there are certainly pros and cons:
 
Boston:
 
I liked the history, and the ability to get to places like Maine in an hour. and NYC in 3+. I liked the crazy road system as I am from London so I felt at home. I liked the people. I did find it a pain in the arse to do simple things though, and the winter. ergh.
 
SF:
 
It feels more like a town than a city. You have to find your niche within. It has taken me awhile to get into it. Being around so much tech can start to be a drain. Sometimes I long for the time when I was living in Madison and noone had a clue what I did ;)
 
And the end of this all, I long for Boulder ;)
 
Heres to you finding your dream location.
 
Cheers,
 
Dion
 
posted by Dion Almaer
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Ive done the Cambridge thing, and am currently doing the Bay Area thing, so I sympathize a bit. Personally, I suggest traveling a bit, and trying out cities around the world. Have some fun. :-)
 
posted by Andrew Wooster
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Well Aaron, you sound like a typical dotcommer, that came, saw, got kicked, and sent back in a body bag.  San Francisco is one of the greatest cultural melting pots, and epicenters of pop culture by far and way behind the likes of Harvard Squarefull of dull bookworms, and..well, squares.  Two-dimensionals.  Enjoy.  :)
 
posted by Leaving Las Vegas
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Your post reminds me of the (famously Bostonian) Mighty Mighty Bosstones song, Almost Anything Goes, which - if Im not mistaken - is largely about nostalgia for Boston over other another city (NYC in that case, but substitute SF and the sentiments the same).
 
posted by Sam Pablo Kuper
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Having to hear jackhammers (and noise in general) is what pushed me away from living in a city environment and into the suburbs. Peace & quiet has been absolutely wonderful for my health, stress level, happiness, and ability to work on projects.
 
posted by Amit Patel
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
I live in Berkeley (across the bay from SF for those who dont know the area), and I also believe that SF is kind of superficial. Berkeley has issues too, but theyre not of the same variety.
 
What I personally dont like about SF is the suffocating trendiness of all the wannabe hipsters with babies on their shoulders, attired in 70s retro-chic t-shirts with carefully made-up hair (made to look not made up) and some kind of wolf-chihuahua or shi-tzu-lhasa-apso flavor-of-the-month hybrid dog in tow.
 
Lots of good stuff comes through town in the way of music though, and the variety and quality of food (for reasonable prices) in restaurants is hard to beat.
 
People are pretty superficial everywhere though, especially the kind of people that think partying and dinner partying with a bunch of different people every week is the peak of existence.
 
I may be wrong, and it may be the case that Cambridge is actually an intellectuals Shangri La that is unlike every other city on the planet (of SF at least), but I suspect that it may be the case that Aaron found a bunch of compatible souls over a relatively long period of time (not by going to parties or quick visits to the library) and that if he went back to Cambridge with a different body and a different name, with the persona he has now (as opposed to that he had when he formed those relationships), and did the things he has talked about doing in SF (going to the library and parties) that his experience would be much the same.
 
posted by JK
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Aaron, I am sorry about your decision. I myself decided to move to the Bay Area (right now I live in New Orleans, which is definitely not the geek or intellectual capital of the USA). Concerning East Coast intellectual dreams: I suggest to move to the real Cambridge, in UK, Eropes (I lived there for 3 months) and I guarantee that your high-browness will be satisfied, although you might still have issues with the weather. You are a very scarce type: a coder/engineer turned philosopher/human intellectual in the US. You have the analytical talent to be successful in philosophy and thereby help a discipline that is not too successful in giving people explanations overall. A lost battle I think. 
I myself started as a biologist, then studied analytical philosophy for 5 years and now I am finally back in science and technology (a reverse direction comparing to yours) so my advice is not advice for you.
Good luck and maybe we can meet at the SciFoo Camp again, Attila 
PS: Oh yeah, and if some day you go to Budapest, where I was born and raised, thats in Hungary, Central Europe, Ill be happy to guide you through the intellectual scenes.
 
posted by Attila Csordas
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
San Francisco is well known as a hard place to relate to  despite all thats going on and all the people seeking something. No one seems to know why. I lived in the city and surrounding areas for about 15 years, then moved to Philadelphia for work. West Philadelphia is fine, except that the whole city is gentrifying, becoming considerably more expensive and driving out good people.
 
I love Harvard Square; went to college there in the 60s and will be visiting at the end of this month. Good Wi-Fi cafes have been scarce right around the Square, but they could be found. There were at least a couple in Central Square. And theres always Somerville.
 
Im working on allowing online financial accounts to actually reproduce children accounts, inherit services, and evolve autonomously through community use  in an open-source project for public benefit. Email me if youre interested. I could meet in Cambridge in the three days or so after June 28, or on a later visit.
 
posted by John S. Jamers
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
And it has actual weather, with real snow and seasons and everything, not this time-stands-still sun that San Francisco insists upon.
 
No! No! This is like It has misery, with cold and wet and everything, not like pleasant sunshine 
 
Buy a pair of sound-deadening ear-protectors to deal with the jackhammers. How anyone could consider that worth exchanging for the slushdrifted streets of Boston in winter, is beyond me.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on June 18, 2008 #
 
Welcome back, Aaron. Come hang out at Berkman!
 
posted by Amar
 on June 20, 2008 #
 
awww shite i just moved to sf to meet you
 
posted by marius
 on June 23, 2008 #
 
Lets see. You dont like traffic delays or construction so youre moving back to live under the Big Dig? I understand not being from here and missing the place that you miss. But your SF trashing is pretty hollow. Maybe you just tend to hang out with shallow people. People dont read books in SF? Give me a break But, hey, glad to see you go.
 
posted by "Dave"
 on June 30, 2008 #
 
I jumped in on this thread b/c although my partner and I live in SF, we often  discuss if another city might be better.  Interestingly, one city thats proposed as better is LA, which is stereotypically more shallow  yet not in our experience.   I think the general stereotypes dont apply and a circle of good friends creates its own microcosm effect.
 
JK - I noticed your anti-dinner party comment, and wondered if you would elaborate?  One of the things we most enjoy are dinner parties - and having new people to each one can be a good thing.
 
posted by david
 on September 10, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June 12, 2008
 
Title: Is Undercover Over?
 
My latest piece for Extra! is now up:
 
Is Undercover Over?: Disguise seen as deceit by timid journalists
 
Its about the rise and fall of undercover journalism. Heres an excerpt:
 
Undercover reporting has a storied history. Nellie Bly, famous for traveling around the world in 80 days, also did a famed investigation of the conditions in insane asylums for the New York World. Bly feigned insanity for a series of physicians before being committed to a lunatic asylum. There she documented rotten and spoiled food, freezing living conditions, frigid bathwater, abusive nurses and relatively sane fellow residents. What, excepting torture, would produce insanity quicker than this treatment? she wondered. The series, later published as the book Ten Days in a Mad-House, created a sensation, and Bly was asked to join a government investigation of asylum conditions.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 12, 2008
 
I liked the article and agree with the opinion that it seems to convey.
 
The question running through my head while reading it, Is it really that hard not to get sued? It seems like you can be creative in your deception and double check your allegations. Furthermore, are allegations made by undercover investigations any more likely to spur a lawsuit than those made through more conventional journalism?
 
posted by Alex
 on June 13, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June  9, 2008
 
Title: How to Promote Startups
 
When people talk about how government can promote startups, there seems to be a fairly standard consensus: we need more economic inequality. Lower income and capital gains taxes provide more incentive to work, looser labor laws make it easier to fire non-performers, and large private wealth funds provide investment capital.
 
But having been through a startup myself, I think theres much more you can do in the other direction: decreasing economic inequality. People love starting companies. You get to be your own boss, work on something you love, do something new and exciting, and get lots of attention. As Daniel Brook points out in The Trap, 28% of Americans have considered starting their own business. And yet only 7% actually do.
 
What holds them back? The lack of a social safety net. A friend of mine, a brilliant young technologist whos been featured everywhere from PBS to Salon, stayed in academia and the corporate world while all of her friends were starting companies and getting rich. Why? Because she couldnt afford to lose her health insurance. Between skyrocketing prices and preexisting condition exclusions, its almost impossible for anyone who isnt in perfect health to quit their job. (I only managed because I was on a government plan.)
 
Anyone with children is also straight out. Startup founders tend to be quite young, in no small part because no one can afford to support a family on a startup founders salary. But if we had universal child care, that would be much less of an issue. Parents would be free to pursue their dreams, knowing that their children were taken care of. And universal higher education could let parents spend their savings on getting a business started, instead of their childrens tuition. Plus, itd give many more kids the training and confidence they needed to start a company.
 
And those large private wealth funds that result from growing inequality? A real problem for startup founders is that theyre too large. It used to be that you could borrow a couple thousand dollars from friends and neighbors to get your business off the ground. Nowadays, theyre too busy trying to make ends meet to be able to afford anything like that. Meanwhile, those large wealth funds I mentioned are now so big they can only afford to invest in multi-million dollar chunks  much more than the average founder needs, or can even justify. And the large investments come with large amounts of scrutiny, further narrowing the recipient pool.
 
But imagine if the government provided a basic minimum income, like Richard Nixon once proposed. Instead of having to save up (increasingly difficult in a world in which the only way to survive is on credit card debt) or borrow money to stay afloat, you could live off the government-provided income as you got things started. Suddenly having to quit your job would no longer be such a huge leap  thered be a real social safety net to catch you. (Not to mention if those labor laws some people want to loosen required your old job to take you back if things didnt work out.)
 
Of course, there is some truth to the standard proposals. Some startup founders are encouraged by dreams of financial security, and high taxes can make that dream more elusive. And complex labor regulations can make it difficult to get new companies off the ground. But its not an issue of whether we should have taxes or labor laws  its an issue of how theyre targeted.
 
Estate taxes on inherited fortunes would have basically no impact on startup founders, but could go a long way to funding a social safety net. And since most startups are acquired as stock, income taxes are basically irrelevant  its really capital gains tax that gets applied. Theres no reason the government couldnt apply a lower capital gains tax to startups that get acquired than they do to the shares of publicly-traded companies that large investors trade.
 
The same is true for labor laws: preventing large companies from firing people 
at random can provide some much-needed stability to their lives, especially if theyre saving up money in the hopes of going into business themselves. But theres no reason such laws also have to be applied to small startups, where the company is more likely to go out of business than to fire you.
 
Look at social democratic Europe, where these policy prescriptions have been tried. While theres much less of a culture of entrepreneurship and only 15% of Europeans think about starting their own company, nearly all (14.7%) of them actually go ahead and do it.
 
The fact is, if governments really want to promote startups and the economic innovation they bring, they shouldnt listen to the standard refrain of cut taxes and deregulate. They need to start rebuilding the social safety net, so that their citizens know that if they go out on a limb and try something risky, someone will be there to catch them if things dont work out.
 
Thanks to Daniel Brooks book The Trap: Selling Out to Stay Afloat in Winner-Take-All America for suggesting this line of argument and providing the statistics.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June  9, 2008
 
I definitely would have quit my job and started my own company long ago if I had access affordable health insurance outside work. But Im not entirely sure that would have been a good decision. While I agree with everything you say here, it still feels like there are some subtle positive aspects of the current environment we may lose with a safety net, e.g. forcing better planning of startups by making them contingent on better life planning. I dont imagine those are anywhere near worth the pitfalls of the current environment, but it would be good to consider them further to ease the transition.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
hi Aaron, this is a very interesting entry! you might be interested by the debates and analyses of the idea of an universal unconditional income, there are several authors discussing it but the books Real Freedom for All by Philippe Van Parijs, and Redesigning Distribution edited by Bruce Ackerman, Anne Alstott and Van Parijs (avail. for free online), are worth reading.
 
posted by pierre
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
Good post.
As an entrepreneur in Israel, having high quality government funded healthcare has certainly helped me bootstrap my current startup. My calculations would have been very different if I had to take health insurance into account.
 
Im not sure though that your conclusion regarding Europeans (where almost all who consider starting a business actually do it) is necessarily correct. 
Maybe in a culture where entrepreneurship isnt as glamorous as it is in the US, those who profess that they consider starting a business are only the real die-hard born-to-be-entrepreneurs, essentially the same people who manage to overcome the hurdles in the US and do their own thing at all costs? 
In a place like California (or Israel for that matter), where entrepreneurship is admired, many more people consider it, or would tell you so in a survey, even though theyre not really serious. I have friends who keep talking about starting their own business, but would probably never do it - not because they lack the wherewithal, but because they havent really got it in them.
 
Moreover, starting a company in most countries of western Europe is much harder than it is in the US. It takes financial commitment up-front, as well as going through a lot of bureaucracy. The state, while it provides the social safety net, puts serious hurdles in the would-be business owners way, and you could argue that these are just as bad as the lack of a safety net.
 
posted by Elad Kehat
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
I think you miss the main problem: sheer time availability.  See my full response here:
 
http://www.cincomsmalltalk.com/blog/blogView?showComments=true&printTitle=Why_so_few_do_startups&entry=3390474479
 
posted by James Robertson
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
Your voice is getting stronger, Aaron. Youre doing good work.
 
URLS for the books Pierre mentions above:
 
Redesigning Distribution
 
Real Freedom For All
 
posted by Bob Erb
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
If you love Iceland so much why dont you go and live there!!111eleventy!1
 
As a longtime professional tracker-of-startups, I note without surprise how many of mine are in Australia, Ireland and Israel now.
 
Scott Reynan: if US entrepreneurs are indeed motivated by fear of bankruptcy, most of them are behaving in remarkably self-defeating ways.
 
posted by Yatima
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
+1, Aaron.
 
Im a parent of 2, and its frustrating as all hell that I cant work out a way to start a startup without putting my family at risk.
 
Its fairly well established that no angel or VC investor will want to look at you until youve at the very least finished a prototype, more likely not until youve finished the product, and even more likely not until youve shown traction by attracting a decent number of users.  In the meantime, that probably means a good year of going without income in order to get to that point.  Whos got the kind of money to keep a family afloat during that time?!?!?!?  Some of us werent born with rich family or friends.
 
I havent figured a way out of this conundrum yet, but Im damn well going to because I refuse to go my whole life working for someone else.  (Most likely in order to fund this Ill have to sell my home, and rent in a cheaper location for a while.)
 
But it sure is good to hear someone going against the conventional wisdom (aka bullshit) on this issue and telling it like it is, Aaron.
 
Meritocracy, my ass!  The startup world is a plutocracy, pure and simple.  If you dont have someone with big bucks behind you, youre shut out.  The only people whose merit matters are the ones who are able to pony up the ante.
 
posted by DAR
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
(A pingback for some of the discussion on hacker news.)
 
I have to say I strongly agree with this. The personal risks I am taking to start a company, are a little crazy, and Ive had no shortage of people telling me so. And I know so many people who are waiting for their life to be settled and stable before they begin. This is one of the main social influences repressing our potential founders.
 
http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=213181
 
and
 
http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=213210
 
posted by Danielle Fong
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
To DAR:
 
What makes you think the rest of us owe you a living?  In life you get to make choices, and you value your family above the pursuit of a startup.  Thats one possible choice.  Why should the rest of us have to pay to give you infinite choices?
 
You might ponder TANSTAAFL.
 
posted by James Robertson
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
Yes, doing a startup is hard for a family, but what about the plan where one spouse gets a corporate job, and the other starts a business?
 
posted by Don Marti
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
I think one reason Europeans are less likely to consider starting their own companies is that employment conditions even in low-end jobs tend to be better here (longer holidays, higher minimum wages, etc).
 
posted by Sam Pablo Kuper
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
How many of these policies would you support even if they had zero impact on startups?  I ask because all your suggestions that are particular to startups actually involve the standard refrain of cut taxes and deregulate
 
Things that are good for everyone are good for everyone but I cant but help notice that your more socialist suggestions are about people not like you (help families and older people, stick it to big business, etc) and your more free market suggestions apply to areas where you have local experience.
 
posted by Jack Diederich
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
Is this satire? Because I really dont see how it could be anything else, except perhaps insanity.
 
The problem with providing these sorts of benefits to everyone is that it removes nearly all extrinsic motivations for work. Unfortunately, I believe that youll find that the fraction of the human population that is intrinsically motivated to work is by no means large enough to support the entire populationand if this is the case, then the reforms you propose would eventually cause the collapse of civilization (assuming that someone did not eventually stop the madness).
 
posted by Dave
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
Yes, Nixon must have been proposing the collapse of civilization. That must be why Denmark and Sweden are no longer on the map.
 
Give me a break.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
How many start-ups are coming out of Denmark and Sweden?  Adjusted for population, are there more or less than are coming out of the US?
 
-Mark
 
posted by Mark
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
Pardon my ignorance, but if one is young ind relatively healthy (and you better be if you are going to work in a startup), what does one need health insurance for?
 
posted by Nickolai Leschov
 on June 11, 2008 #
 
Great minds move in
 
The Basic Income Guarantee is championed eloquently by Martin Luther King, Jr.
 
http://www.cooperativeindividualism.org/king-martin-luther_on-poverty.html
 
Its from his last book.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on June 11, 2008 #
 
Why do you think people who start companies need to be relatively healthy? My health problems never affected my startup work.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on June 11, 2008 #
 
I agree with some of your arguments, particularly the one about health insurance. I mean, survive you must, and fear of dying doesnt help startup founders to be bold.
 
But I also know how incredibly hard it is in many european countries to get your own business started, and to a large degree it is hard because of the safety net that others enjoy.
 
That famous european safety net has one salient characteristic. Its much better for those groups who are better organised and who have a long tradition of being close to the government and the political parties. Pensioners, workers in well unionised sectors, farmers, civil servants, railway workers, medical doctors, teachers, etc.
 
As a startup founder, almost by definition, you dont belong to any of those groups. When I started my first business, I had to pay hugely more social security contributions and taxes than any 9 to 5 worker (relative to my meagre income). Effectively, I had to pay for their safety net, a safety net that partly excludes entrepreneurs. If I couldve just kept my own money, pay nothing and get nothing, I wouldve been better off.
 
I agree that a basic safety net that catches you when you fall is a good thing. But that european safety net catches like 80% of the people, costs almost 50% of our income and fails many of those who actually need it. I wonder if that is an automatic consequence of democratically organised redistribution.
 
posted by fauigerzigerk
 on June 11, 2008 #
 
To DAR:
 
What makes you think the rest of us owe you a living? In life you get to make choices, and you value your family above the pursuit of a startup. Thats one possible choice. Why should the rest of us have to pay to give you infinite choices?
 
You might ponder TANSTAAFL.
 
Dude, I think you are either totally messedup or just plain trying to garner some attention. Indendently speaking, I can understand and appreciate your statement. Having read DARs comment though, I fail to see the connection that you are trying to imply. The mans just trying to vent his frustration that the current attitude of VCs and such like is such that it does not allow for any leeway of risk such as having a family. TANSTAAFL indeed. For you, I would have to respond - GTFOH*
 
*Get the Finnegan outta here.
 
posted by Timmy Jose
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
To DAR:
 
What makes you think the rest of us owe you a living? In life you get to make choices, and you value your family above the pursuit of a startup. Thats one possible choice. Why should the rest of us have to pay to give you infinite choices?
 
You might ponder TANSTAAFL.
 
@ Robertson
 
Dude, I think you are either totally messedup or just plain trying to garner some attention. Indendently speaking, I can understand and appreciate your statement. Having read DARs comment though, I fail to see the connection that you are trying to imply. The mans just trying to vent his frustration that the current attitude of VCs and such like is such that it does not allow for any leeway of risk such as having a family. TANSTAAFL indeed. For you, I would have to respond - GTFOH*
 
*Get the Finnegan outta here.
 
posted by Timmy Jose
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
Great post, Aaron. By the way, not exactly start-up related, but similar reasons were a major economic factor driving me to abandon my civil-liberties activism. It was just too dangerous to risk lack of employment.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
Your intro paragraph infers it all: we need more economic inequality. Lower income and capital gains taxes provide more incentive to work, looser labor laws make it easier to fire non-performers, and large private wealth funds provide investment capital. <br/>
This statement is not economic theory: not that you state it is, but rather that mainstream business and politics tell us it is.  This construct is barely even economic hypothesis; not even well founded wishful thinking. Rather wolfish greed wrapped in lambskin. <br/>
I have been an IT entrepreneur for 20 years and never consider those economic principals when making my start-up decisions.  I have only accomplished my most recent startup, ShellShadow because I am living in China now and have economic leverage to do so on a tight budget.<br/>
The theory that people create due to economic inequality is pure bunk.  People can get very rich due to economic inequality but it has little to do with creativity or a desire to create.
 
posted by Jon Hancock
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
Aaron:
 
Lack of adequate healthcare affects some 25 million Americans, a significant portion of them, like me, who are working citizens who contribute to the system in the form of taxes, and sometimes, cash payments for medical services needed. I think its shameful that we cant even get a basic level of standard medical protection for our nation all because of greed, greed, greed. I feel for all those people who find themselves in the position of being forced to chose bankruptcy due to a pressing illness.
 
posted by Anthony Kuhn
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
The safety net is a good pointyou are right, it was previously friends and family, but today most are tapped out.
 
However, instead of the government stepping in, what if friends, family, spouses, and want-to-be entrepenuers stopped promising away their entire current and future income (via mortgages and loans) so that they could go back to being the social safety net that they once were?
 
My grandparents at several times lived with other family, and several times had other family live with them, while starting out. And so while they used mortgages and loans, it wasnt so early and so leveraged that they could no longer be a safety net for others.
 
Granted, their lifestyle was not what most people likely expect these daysbut that is a trade off everyone is free to make, lower your lifestyle today and have more choices, or raise your lifestyle today and have less choices.
 
(Basically, DAG is righthe should sell the house he can only afford on a 30-year corporate salary and rent in a cheaper location. That is economic tradeoffs and it works much better when individuals make these decisions for themselves instead of the government deciding for the whole citizenship that it knows best.)
 
I also wonder how much the lack of a safety net is real or just perceived due to our individualistic, self-reliant culture.
 
Granted, I admire your goals, but good goals doesnt mean that, once in place, a program will automatically acheive those goals. Goals vs. incentives is discussed nicely in Basic Economics by Thomas Sowell.
 
posted by Stephen
 on June 12, 2008 #
 
Im surprised you didnt mention behavioral economics to explain the statistics. Isnt it obvious that the biggest barrier to start-ups is risk aversion? When I tell people Im working for a startup, the vast majority of responses is oooh, risky!.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on June 14, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 19, 2008
 
Title: The False Consciousness Falsehood
 
American intellectual life has a large number of ways of responding to an argument without actually addressing its substance  namecalling in other words. You can say that someone is blaming the victim or spinning a conspiracy theory or assuming people are stupid or that theyre subject to false consciousness.
 
Most of these are kind of transparently silly, but even otherwise smart people seem to think the false consciousness charge has some heft to it. The argument is never fully spelled-out, but the argument seems to be that to think that people are systematically mistaken about their own interests is the kind of crazy idea that only vulgar Marxists would believe and, furthermore, it requires assuming that people are stupid and explaining how youve been able to see past the illusion.
 
Well, Im personally not under any illusion that providing a rational explanation is going to stop people from leveling this charge, but I figure one ought to, if only to set the record straight.
 
Lets begin with a parable  a simplified case that will at least establish whether some of these arguments are logically true. Imagine a new regime comes to power that decides to imprison everyone with red hair. They insist that there is nothing amiss about this  they were elected democratically, and furthermore, everyone imprisoned is still allowed to vote. But inside the prisons, they only permit limited contact with the outside world. Most prisoners only watch the one prison-provided news station which is systematically biased, constantly suggesting that the Purple Party is in favor of additional rights for red-haired people while their opponents, the Yellow Party, just used the red-haired issue for pandering. (Anyone whos watched, say, Fox News discuss black issues will know how this is possible.) The result is that when election time rolls around, the majority of red-haired prisoners vote for the Purple Party candidate who gets into power and provides no new rights for them.
 
Call it false consciousness or not, I think its perfectly reasonable to look at this situation and say while the red-haired prisoners are not stupid, they are systematically mistaken, which is leading them to act against their own interests. If they knew the truth they would vote for the Yellow Party, the party which wants to take steps to get them out of prison, instead. Furthermore, its possible to imagine that there are some prisoners who, through one means or another, have learned this and thus are able to see this situation while the other prisoners do not. (They try to tell the other prisoners whats going on, but they keep getting labeled conspiracy theorists.)
 
Now obviously vast portions of America are not imprisoned. But most people do get their news from a small number of sources and I think everyone would agree that, in one way or another, these sources are systematically biased. (You can argue about which way theyre biased or whether it makes a difference, but I think its pretty clear that all the major news sources share a general conception of what is news and what isnt.) So why is it so implausible that something similar is going on?
 
The major difference between the two scenarios is that in the first, people were basically forced to watch the biased news, while in the real world they have lots of other alternatives. But Im not sure this matters as much as it might seem at first.
 
First, most people have busy lives that dont revolve around the news or politics and thus are going to get the news in the most convenient form they can. For most people, this is typically television or the newspaper. But starting a new television station or newspaper is very expensive, especially if you want it to have wide reach, and the only projects that can get funding and advertising are those that buy into at least some of the systematic biases. So for most people, there simply isnt a better alternative when it comes to the formats they want.
 
Second, even if someone gets their news from the Internet or another source where getting started is less expensive, they may not know about the alternatives. If you grew up with your parents reading the New York Times you may simply live your life checking in on nytimes.com, without ever stopping to wonder whether the news you were getting was systematically biased and whether there was some more preferable alternative.
 
Again, just as there was no way for the prisoners to know they were being lied to, its not really reasonable for the average person to figure out that theyre getting biased news if the only news they read comes from biased sources.
 
Now Im not arguing here that this idea is true (that would require more real-world evidence), merely that its possible. The fact is that we live in a world where most people get their information about whats going on from a very small number of sources which tend to report largely the same things in the same way. This seems like a rather important fact of life and I think we ought to stop dismissing suggestions that it might have some negative effects on people out of hand.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 19, 2008
 
The argument is never fully spelled-out, but the argument seems to be that Sounds like a strawman. Do you have any actual examples of this argument being made?
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on May 19, 2008 #
 
I think one major reluctance to accepting conspiracy theories on a large level is that, to reference a previous post, people dont believe that the mechanism exists.  If there was media bias of a malevolent sort, then there must be a conspiracy to construct and enforce that bias.  Editors punish their subordinates.  Editors themselves must be informed of what the accepted lines of thought are.  People have proposed mechanisms for this, have documented actual processes.  But its not clear that those form the bias, because for everyplace that has such hints of conspiracy there is a large number of places that clearly have no conspiracy (often just for lack of interestingness).
 
Another aspect is none of this seems new.  Its not like the media was crazy progressive and then this darn media consolidation came along and ruined it.  Is this the product of a long line of conspiracies?  The masons?
 
Im more apt to see this as a phenomena than a conspiracy.  That is, accepting that people can have false beliefs on a large scale doesnt require a malevolent actor.  Theres lots of cases of this that are rather obvious in retrospect.  Flat Earth  that people have at times widely believed the Earth to be flat is not a sign of wide stupidity.  Our intuitions can be reasonable while also being incorrect.  Revealing the truth does not automatically convert everyones belief.
 
The mechanisms by which we come to other beliefs is probably different than something so fact-based as the nature of the surface of the Earth.  But theres obviously more involved than simple rationality, especially because many value-based beliefs are rooted in underlying motivations that cant really be rational.
 
posted by Ian Bicking
 on May 19, 2008 #
 
Hope all is well, and that your health has improved after that discouraging post from a few months ago.  I think what youre talking about is whats plausible rather than whats logical or rational. It would be just as valid to spin a self-serving parable demonstrating how the idea of false consciousness fails to explain events, and wed have learned as much from the exercise. I also dont understand the point of the conclusion: that its merely possible the idea of false consciousness can be valid, given an impressive stack of assumptions. And?
 
posted by sierra
 on May 20, 2008 #
 
With reference to a previous post:  Im not sure what counts as a mechanism.  How about putting oilmen in charge of regulating the oil business and Mideast policy?  How about controlling the flow of informatione.g. concealing M3 monetary levels, refusing to allow photos of troop caskets, putting the financing apparatus for an entire foreign adventure (often referred to as a war) off budget, selling off public spaces, lands, and airwaves?
 
Aaron, Ive only just discovered your blog and am intrigued by it.  Drop by over at http://wisdomofthewest.blogspot.com/  You might find something interesting.  My latest series is on the phenomenon of crowds and swarms and I happened onto your site while searching the stupidity of crowds.
 
Best,
Jim H.
 
posted by Jim H.
 on May 21, 2008 #
 
Reading the post again, the first couple of paragraphs strike me as confusing. The first states that saying someone is subject to false consciousness is a way of avoiding the substance of any argument hes making  namecalling in other words. The second says essentially the opposite: that criticizing this assignment of false consciousness is an invalid form of namecalling, i.e., by labeling the idea of false consciousness as crazy or Marxist. (The first paragraph only makes sense in the context of the rest of the post if it ends with something like: or assigning false consciousness to people.)
 
These opening paragraphs are amusing as well. After being told this charge constitutes namecalling, we learn it is transparently silly. Unintelligent people can of course be expected to make such a charge, but even otherwise smart people make it as well. Regardless, youre not under any illusion that providing a rational explanation is going to stop people from leveling this charge. So: silly, stupid, and irrational. Nope, no namecalling here.
 
posted by sierra
 on May 22, 2008 #
 
Aaron
 
You should check out the blog Unqualified Reservations.  He makes a pretty convincing case that the biases in the media are indeed systematic.
See
http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/06/separation-of-information-and-security.html
and
http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/06/why-theres-no-such-thing-as-liberal.html
 
Whats interesting is that you dont need a conspiracy theory to get the result of conspiracy theory.  All you need to do is look at the selection process.  Can an economics professor be fired for being wrong?  Nope.  But a professor can get more grants and power by justifying the prevailing political powers.
 
Were Bill Kristol and Tom Friedman fired for being wrong about the war in Iraq?  Bill Kristol was promoted to the NY Times editorial page!
 
If the media and educational system do not seem to be promoting or firing people based on whether they get things right and wrong, why would we expect the process to produce accurate results?
 
posted by Patrick
 on May 23, 2008 #
 
You have some truly bizarre spam just above this comment.
 
I agree with Sierra that the first couple of paragraphs are muddled.  From the rest of your essay, youre apparently claiming that the charge of false consciousness should be taken seriously in a debate.  But thats not how you start off.
 
I think it is possible for people to be systematically mistaken about this or that, and its reasonable to discuss that possibility in itself, as you start to do here.
 
But in an ordinary discussion about some other subject, accusing your opponent of false consciousness is not an argument, its a failure to argue.  Its an example of the logical fallacy poisoning the well.  Reasonable people are right to reject it in those cases.
 
posted by Matt C
 on June  9, 2008 #
 
Matts comment made me wonder what kind of criteria would make the idea of false consciousness valid. I think it would require a good deal of ignorance or physical coercion, and would be least likely in an information-saturated modern society. E.g., Ive heard many women in strict Islamic cultures express strong approval for their burkas, but its valid to assume (if theyre not lying outright) thats false consciousness resulting from the constant threat of beating or worse if they dont wear a burka, or perhaps from having no accurate information on societies where women wear whatever they want. The flip-side, to use an obvious example: In this culture, women arent beaten for being pro-choice on abortion, and they have plenty of pro-choice information available to them, so its correspondingly invalid to suggest pro-life women suffer from false consciousness. Aarons parable is unconvincing because it involves taking great pains to limit available information, which simply is not our situation. The idea that people with huge numbers of alternative media sources available to them are going to keep reading the New York Times out of blind habit is contradicted by the latters stock price, and by the sudden, spontaneous popularity of sites like YouTube, Facebook, you name it.
 
Theres an excellent book called Sick Societies, by the anthropologist Harold Edgerton. Ostensibly its a critique of the idea that primitive cultures are peaceful and harmonious, and that all sorts of horrifying (to us) practices are adaptive in the evolutionary sense. But the more interesting implication is the possibility of determining whether aspects of our own culture are objectively dysfunctional, criteria he says may be borrowed from psychology. Im skeptical how rigorous that framework would be, but its an interesting book thats relevant to the question, if you care to take a look.
 
posted by sierra
 on June 15, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 14, 2008
 
Title: Tectonic Plates and Microfoundations
 
In 1915, Alfred Wegener argued that all the continents of Earth once used to fit together as one giant supercontinent, which he later named Pangea. As Wikipedia summarizes:
 
In his work, Wegener presented a large amount of circumstantial evidence in support of continental drift, but he was unable to come up with a convincing mechanism. Thus, while his ideas attracted a few early supporters  the hypothesis was generally met with skepticism. The one American edition of Wegeners work  was received so poorly that the American Association of Petroleum Geologists organized a symposium specifically in opposition.  By the 1930s, Wegeners geological work was almost universally dismissed by the scientific community and remained obscure for some thirty years.
 
Today, of course, every schoolchild knows about Pangea. But for a long time the theory was dismissed, not because it lacked evidence or predictive power  it explained why the shapes of the continents fit together, why mountain ranges and coal fields lined up, why similar fossil were found in places separated by oceans, and so on  but because Wegener had no plausible mechanism.
 
A similar problem happens in the social sciences. Paul Krugman recently noted that while Larry Bartels (in his new book Unequal Democracy) provides solid, convincing evidence that Republican presidents systematically preside over slower growth and increasing inequality, most social scientists dont believe him because we havent yet identified the mechanisms. Krugman:
 
Now, Im a big Bartels fan; Ive known about this result for quite a while. But Ive never written it up. Why? Because I cant figure out a plausible mechanism. Even though I believe that politics has a big effect on income distribution, this is just too strong  and too immediate  for me to see how it can be done. Sure, Republicans want an oligarchic society  but how can they do that?
 
Bartels, for his part, argues that providing the mechanisms isnt his job  his goal is to highlight the phenomena and encourage many others to research the mechanisms:
 
How do presidents produce these substantial effects?
 
One of my aims in writing Unequal Democracy was to prod economists and policy analysts to devote more attention to precisely that question. Douglas Hibbs did important work along these lines  He found that Democrats favored expansionary policies  while Republicans endured and sometimes prolonged recessions in order to keep inflation in check. (Not coincidentally, unemployment mostly affects income growth among relatively poor people, while inflation mostly affects income growth among relatively affluent people.) In recent decades taxes and transfers have probably been more important. Social spending. Business regulation or lack thereof. And dont forget the minimum wage. Over the past 60 years, the real value of the minimum wage has increased by 16 cents per year under Democratic presidents and declined by 6 cents per year under Republican presidents; thats a 3% difference in average income growth for minimum wage workers, with ramifications for many more workers higher up the wage scale. So, while I dont pretend to understand all the ways in which presidents policy choices shape the income distribution, I see little reason to doubt that the effects are real and substantial.
 
When it comes to addressing such arguments more generally, the most famous commentator is Jon Elster. In his classic article Marxism, Functionalism, and Game Theory, he insists:
 
Without a firm knowledge about the mechanisms that operate at the individual level, the grand Marxist claims about macrostructures and long-term change are condemned to remain at the level of speculation.
 
(To be fair, Elster doesnt make this as a general argument, but his vehemence has led some of his followers to suggest that it is.)
 
To be clear, I think discovering mechanisms is important work. All Im arguing is that it shouldnt be a necessity for believing in a theory. Instead, I believe its an irrational side-effect of an emotional distaste for gaps in knowledge.
 
As evidence, let me note that such demands for mechanisms never go more than one level deep. Nobody has ever said, Well, your theory that people are motivated by greed is all very nice, but I just cant believe it until you can explain how greed is manifested in the brain. Neuroscience is obviously the microfoundation of psychology, but psychological theories are regularly accepted without neuroscientific microfoundations.
 
In general, it seems like such commentators support a double-standard. Theories with mechanisms should be judged by their fit with the evidence and predictive power. Theories without mechanisms should be judged by the evidence and predictive power and whether you can think of any plausible mechanisms. I dont see how this can be justified. Theres no reason mechanism should be privileged in the assessment of knowledge; things are true or false, even if we dont know why they are true or false.
 
Indeed, it we typically only investigate the causes of phenomena once were convinced that they exist. (Elster admits as much in Explaining Social Behavior, noting that establishing a phenomenas existence is the first step towards explaining it.) So lets stop making the mistake of not believing things are true because we dont know how they happen.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 14, 2008
 
Without a mechanism, how can we distinguish between cause and effect?  Perhaps people turn to Republicans because of other actually causal phenomena.  And frankly, in any social situation, causality just wont be there  too many feedback loops and too many independent actors.
 
If all someone is arguing for is correlation, then thats a rather boring thing to argue about.  Causation is the thing that is exciting.
 
Even causation can be a little boring.  Causation that can be effected and changed, now that is interesting.
 
The scientific approach then would be to empirically determine what can cause change.  What are electrons, or protons, or quarks?  Eh, who knows, but we know how we can manipulate things with them, how we can see the side effects.  Social theory often seems more interested in what these things are, as though there is some value to the thing itself, and not so interested in what can be done.
 
posted by Ian Bicking
 on May 14, 2008 #
 
You seem to believe that not having a mechanism limits you to making claims about correlation, not causation. Thats not true at all. Imagine someone gave you a red button and pressing it caused a man to shout yap! You can clearly establish a causal connection  do double-blind tests if you have to  even if you have no idea how it makes the man say that.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 14, 2008 #
 
I would say its sometimes not an easy task to figure out whats true but unexplained, what seems to be true but is a thinking error, whats lies that are just widely repeated, whats correlation but not causation, whats finding spurious coincidences, etc.
 
Yes, things are true or false - but you dont know which is which beforehand.
 
Politics can be especially hard, since there are people who have as their jobs making the false seem true, and the true seem false.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on May 14, 2008 #
 
Interesting post, which I generally agree with.  But this In general, it seems like such commentators support a double-standard is incorrect.
 
Theres one standard: Theories should be judged by the evidence and predictive power and whether you can think of any plausible mechanisms.  It just happens that for theories with mechanisms you can, in fact, think of plausible mechanisms.
 
Otherwise its like arguing  a double-standard. Theories without evidence are to be judged by their predictive power and whether you can think of any evidence.  Theories with evidence are to be judged by their predictive power alone.
 
posted by David Montgomery
 on May 14, 2008 #
 
I agree that this is an interesting correlation, and in general that we should look for mechanisms
 
But at the same time we should always worry that the effect might not exist. For this one I know of three objections:
 
It needs a one-year lag between president and income. Thats not implasible but its one more parameter.
 
It uses pre-tax family income, from income tax I think? This is somewhat succeptible to adjustments to minimise tax paid. Higher taxes can scare the rich into sheltering income somehow. (I think this is the same data that leads to an underestimate of inequality in the 70s, for this reason.)
 
Werent the republicans supposed to be the party of fiscal prudence, earlier in this data set? In other words the categories shift over time.
 
posted by improbable
 on May 15, 2008 #
 
Shame on you, Aaron. You should know better than to look for awkward correlations between enormous generalizations.
 
I dont know enough to argue, but even if there is a correlation between Dems and progress, we should be careful what you do with such correlations.
 
Consider one of those old hand-powered water pumps. Observing someone operating the pump would lead you to conclude that there is a clear correlation between pushing down on the handle and water coming out. Surely, we would be tempted to conclude, there is no point to lifting the handle at all. To maximize the amount of water we get, we should just sit on the handle.
 
Our economic and political systems are much more complicated than we have so far been able to comprehend, and looking for correlations between changing political labels and imprecise economic measurements is silly.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on May 17, 2008 #
 
Just FYI, the time-stamp on comments seems to be ~2 days off.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on May 17, 2008 #
 
People weigh a lot of factors when deciding whether a theory is plausible.  If you have a demonstrated mechanism, that makes a theory more plausible than if youve just imagined up a possible mechanism.
 
Its not irrational to include it in the factors weighed, even if it would be irrational to make it a be-all-and-end-all criterion for plausibility.
 
posted by 
 on May 18, 2008 #
 
Maybe a concrete example would help.  If my computer crashes while Im depressed, I dont even seriously consider the possibility that it did so because Im depressed.  If it does so 10 times, and none when Im cheerful, then I start to wonder, but again, suspect that Im missing something else thats actually causing it.  If it happens 1000 times, and none when Im cheerful, and I cant find any more plausible causes, then I start to accept that its caused by my depression, even though it seems unlikely, i.e. despite the lack of plausible mechanism.
 
posted by 
 on May 18, 2008 #
 
I write about medical research. Here, people are more likely to believe a drug works if a plausible mechanism is known. But this is almost entirely because a plausible mechanism gives a boost to difficult decision-making under uncertainty. If there is clear empirical evidence, then people will use an important drug whether any mechanism is available or not.
 
Thanks for letting me know about Unequal Democracy, and the strong evidence of a Democratic/Republican difference. Clearly presidents can do a lot to mess up the country. If they can do it in part by changing widespread public attitudes and assumptions (as seems plausible), then the time frame to make actual changes could be a day or less. Of course the economic statistics will need some time to catch up.
 
posted by John S James
 on May 20, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 13, 2008
 
Title: Simplistic Sociological Functionalism
 
(I thought I should talk about the other form of functionalism for a change.)
 
Often sociologists notice a pattern in which certain attributes of a social system fits well with a particular social structure. To take an example I have at hand, Rosabeth Moss Kanter notes that because a secretary has access to facts that could embarrass her boss, its convenient for the boss that the secretary is entirely dependent upon him for wages and status.
 
Unfortunately, these claims are often phrased as saying X causes Y. Heres how Kanter does it:
 
The possibilities for blackmail inherent in [a secretarys] access  to the real story behind the bosss secrets  made it important that she identify her interest as running with, rather than against, his. Thus, forces were generated for the maintenance of a system in which the secretary  was to find her status and reward level dependent on the status and, hence, success of her boss. (Men and Women of the Corporation, 82)
 
Note that, although she is unusually careful to hedge her comments (made it important, forces were generated, maintenance of a system) Kanter is making a particular historical claim here: the secretary could blackmail, which pushed the boss to tighten control. But this is not the type of claim that Kanter, whos research consisted mostly of direct observation of present-day offices, is likely to have any real evidence for.
 
Making such claims is problematic, both because most sociologists dont really know whether they are strictly true, and because they lead Jon Elster to show up at your house and yell at you for hours. But both problems can be easily avoided: simply rephrase such comments to describe the phenomena as effects rather than causes.
 
Instead of saying a secretarys ability to blackmail leads bosses to tighten their grip, simply note that the bosss tight grip has the effect of weakening the secretarys ability to blackmail. You get all the same points across and nobody gets hurt. See? Easy.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 13, 2008
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 12, 2008
 
Title: How to Fix the News
 
Newspaper circulation continues to decline. The top-selling paper in the country, USA Today, distributes only 2 million copies a day (half, no doubt, placed outside hotel room doors). Around the same number, with an average age of 71, watch The OReilly Factor nightly, with the number decreasing as the audience dies off. Everyone quietly concedes the news industry is dying. Its the Internets fault, they all assure us.
 
But what if it wasnt? The other day I heard a news program that was so good that I wanted to listen to it again. And Im not alone  all my friends have been talking about it as well. And while I dont have exact numbers, it seems as popular as any one of those other news outlets. That show? The This American Life episode on The Global Pool of Money  a comprehensive explanation of the housing mess.
 
There were three things about the show that made it stand out from the rest of the news pack:
 
It believed in the intelligence of its audience. It didnt try to pander with sex or disasters or quick cuts. It took a serious news story and investigated it thoroughly for a full hour, with only one break. And it didnt try and dumb any of it down  it explained the whole thing, from top to bottom.
 
It didnt assume you already knew the subject. Most news stories on important topics are incomprehensible to the average person who doesnt know much about their topic. Heres a quote from a random news story about the housing crisis: They said financial institutions have been unwilling to expose themselves to the mortgage market, and lenders are hesitant to lend to risky borrowers in a declining house price market after the subprime meltdown. Unless youve been following the story (like the reporter, presumably) do you really know what that means? TAL instead assumed you knew nothing and explained every component and term so that you actually had a picture of what was going on.
 
It was done in an entertaining and conversational tone. It didnt treat the news as some important series of facts that had to be seriously conveyed to you. It treated it as something interesting they wanted to tell you about, a story that involved real peoples lives (who you got to hear from at length) and was full of genuinely interesting pieces. Look at that news quote above one more time. Can you really imagine someone sitting down and saying that with a straight face?
 
At first these things may seem contradictory  how can you believe in the intelligence of your audience while assuming they dont know anything? how can you be entertaining and yet still explain a subject?  but the more you think about them you see how well they fit together. Being intelligent doesnt mean youre knowledgeable; it means youre curious. Which means you want to hear the whole story from beginning to end and which means you might actually find it entertaining. And being conversational prevents you from assuming the mask that lets you talk down to your audience while pretending they only need to hear the handful of new facts that youre providing.
 
In every other field, that kind of formality has been dropped. Even banks run advertisements these days about how their associates will be your friend. And yet the news chugs along with its arrogant formality, watching its audience get older and older, and wondering why its circulation is declining.
 
Together, these three points seem like the recipe for a genuine news show: intelligent, comprehensive, and entertaining. And yet, I cant think of a single thing that follows them. Surely in an era of desperation and experimentation, the wacky idea of actually respecting your audience has to be worth a try by someone. Anyone want to give it a shot?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 12, 2008
 
I too enjoyed the NPR/This American Life The Global Pool of Money programme.   But, there has been plenty of good coverage in the press if you chose to look.  See e.g. http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2008/apr/08/creditcrunch.banking .
 
And Im not so sure that the news is broken.  The decline in sales is probably indicative of some other wider (societal) issue.
 
posted by Benjamin
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
That article conveys far less information and is a lot less readable than the TAL piece. Its a pretty standard long newspaper feature and I cant imagine the average person understanding the situation from it or even getting thru it. (Compare Susan Faludis introduction to her book Backlash to her newspaper article on LBOs and youll see how impossible it is to do good work in that format.)
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
If you really want an alternative, heres a much better piece of journalism on the subject:
 
http://docs.google.com/TeamPresent?docid=ddp4zq7n_0cdjsr4fn&skipauth=true
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
I agree that the TAL piece was excellent, but I wouldnt say that the Guardian pieces conveys far less information.  Perhaps the Guardian didnt touch on the relaxation of regulations for US mortgage applications prior to the crunch, but the general story and main issues (viz. nature of CDOs and rating agency mistakes) are still there.
 
Unfortunately many (most?) things are inherently complex and require more than a 2 minute segment in a news programme to allow viewers/readers to gain a thorough understanding.   My view is that the news media merely point out a subset of stories  usually relevant to only them and or their publishers/owners  and leave it to us to find out more.
 
I dont think there is enough time in the day to allow one hour programmes examining each and every pressing issue arising in the world.
 
posted by Benjamin
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
I dont think there is enough time in the day to allow one hour programmes examining each and every pressing issue arising in the world.
 
Luckily the pressing issues dont change every day; a daily one hour program could cover each of them in turn and convey much more understanding than traditional news.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
Absolutely agree with you, Aaron.  That program is a gem, as are many other programs on NPR.  Wish a greater portion of the folks who appreciate these programs would pony up even a modest amount of financial support for public radio; maybe then I wouldnt have to deal with the aggravating and all-too-frequent pledge drives :(
 
posted by Adam
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
Citation for the average age of OReilly Factor viewers?  Or was that a joke?
 
posted by John
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
From the few eps Ive heard online (including this one), This American Life does a fantastic job at telling stories in a compelling way.  Its funny to hear the reporters continually remind you of the individual personalities involved in a storyeven one as big as the credit crisisyou can tell they really try to personalize a story to give it life.
 
Cable news is like information candy.  This feels more nourishing.
 
posted by Kevin W.
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
This is frivolous, but I cant stand listening to Ira Glass (or almost anyone else on NPR, for that matter).  I dont suppose theres a transcript?
 
posted by Cosma
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
And Im not alone  all my friends have been talking about it as well.
 
As the apocryphal story runs How could Richard Nixon have won? Everyone I know voted for McGovern!
 
I enjoy TAL too  but more relevantly, you might note they eke out a living on the fringes of the media world, competing with rant-radio and pop-music. Quality is a hard sell in terms of profitability.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
The 71 number comes from this NYT article from 2006 on Olbermann.
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/07/11/arts/television/11keit.html
 
MSNBCs research claims that the median age for Mr. OReillys audience is 71, while Mr. Olbermanns is 59. (Fox and CNN both report that the only figures they get for median age of shows with older audiences is 65 plus, and that Mr. OReillys audience falls into that category.)
 
So however you want to put it, its clearly the senior citizens.
 
Of course, that was in 2006. If the trend held, the number is probably getting even older.
 
posted by Dan Lewis
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
1.5 million viewers as well as a pay-cable television show is eking out a living? What planet are you on?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
The only other outlets that I can think of to come close to the NPR story are The Daily Show and The Colbert Report, which are more about humor than the news.  The scary thing is they generally provide more interesting / useful coverage than the news networks (often by lampooning the networks).
 
posted by Jason
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
http://www.talkers.com/main/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=17&Itemid=34
 
Though if that 1.5 million number is true, its doing better than Id expect.
 
FYI, this is funny:
 
http://www.kasperhauser.com/this_am_life.html
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
This American Life is not an NPR program.  It is produced by PRI (Public Radio International).
 
posted by Phil Mocek
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
There is additional advantage to reading in comparison with watching - you are under less influence of the author.  This is why you take contracts to home to read them alone - you can gather more intellectual resources for critical thinking when you free your mind from the image of the author.
 
posted by Zbigniew Lukasiak
 on May 12, 2008 #
 
That still doesnt answer the question over how the 270 million people in the US will get their news. This American Life is a great program, but it appeals to a minority audience: Those that have 1 hour to listen to a news program. How do we get the public, most of whom dont have much time, engaged once again with news? and interested in it? After visiting WV over the weekend I was surprised how many individuals I spoke to thought Obama was a muslim and had the same philosophy as Rev Wright. That doesnt suggest the media (of which I am one) is doing a good job.
 
posted by Paul Guinnessy
 on May 13, 2008 #
 
Phil Mocek, very good point.  I stand corrected.  What I should have been encouraging was donating to ones public radio station, not NPR specifically.
 
And Paul, I hate to say this, but while I largely agree with Aaron and others that our media can and should do a better job reporting the news I also think people need to take responsibility for their own education and enlightenment.   You can put delicious and nutritious food in front of folks, but if they still insist on eating cotton candy and slurpees, well
 
posted by Adam
 on May 13, 2008 #
 
Hi Aaron,
 
Great article on an important. I can understand your thoughts on why news seem indecipherable to so many. However, I would agree with some of the other commentators here to say that:
1) this is not a model that can be replicated enmass.
2) this is not the reason why newspaper/print media companies are performing poorly.
 
1) As others have stated above, everyday news is only able to provide daily developments in current issues. They are not able to reiterate the entire history everyday. When I was in highschool and first began reading the newspaper, I had a lot of difficulty since the type of information given is not conducive to the understanding by a first time reader. However, now, since I have a stronger knowledge base to reference from, I find I can last a week between newspaper reading the paper but still completely understand most current events. For the purposes of ongoing and protracted issues, daily developments can only be published piecemeal. However, I agree that a pervasive and complex event could be better explained by a Special report that speaks to the publics intelligence and background knowledge.
(Note: If you enjoy this type of reporting, may I recommend BBC News channel- up to the date news reports punctuated by indepth analyses of specific issues)
 
2) Print media, like many industries, underwent a giant transformation due to the advent of the internet. But content isnt the reason why companies suffered- Delivery was. Companies like Wall Street Journal and the one newspaper Buffet invested in (Chicago based I think) adapted to the internet quite well. It can further be said that Print Media companies had full advantage in using the internet. They were well capitalized, had the infrastructure and network, and many other barriers to entry to be first movers in this space. However, management was incapable of seizing this opportunity.
 
I conclude by saying that i agree with you in that our core audiences needs have changed. However, I would not surmise to think that more exhaustive content is a solution to the print media woes of today. What are your thoughts? Is there room for agreement between our views?
 
posted by Edward Marcus Lam
 on May 13, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 12, 2008
 
Title: Science or Philosophy?: Jon Elster and John Searle
 
As the name suggests, the social sciences have often seen themselves as an analogue or extension of the natural sciences and have from the beginning aspired to their successes. Like many who want to duplicate success they do not understand, social sciences has been obsessed with duplicating the form of the natural sciences and not its motivations. Just as rival music player manufacturers have tried to copy the look of the iPod without understanding why it takes that look, the social sciences have copied the structure of the natural sciences without understanding why they take that structure.
 
The greatest success of the natural sciences is undoubtedly the laws of physics. Here, an handful of simple equations can accurately predict the motion of a vast variety of everyday objects under common actions. Seeing this, social scientists have aspired to derive similar laws that predict the behavior of whole societies. (Others, meanwhile insist the entire project is impossible because the society will respond to the creation of the law, making the law invalid  reflexivity.)
 
But reflection upon the history of the natural sciences will see that this notion is insane. Physics did not develop thru attempts to discover the laws that explained all of motion. Instead, various kinds of motion (like falling objects) were described, rules for their behavior deduced, and commonalities in those rules discovered. Eventually it was the case that the commonalities were so great and the rules so few that a handful of laws could explain most of the phenomena, but this assumption was not made a priori.
 
Jon Elster argues that the social sciences should proceed in a similar way: various social phenomena should be described, the mechanisms that give rise to them explained, and the commonalities among mechanisms discovered. Most of his work consists of practicing social science in this way, with a few attempts at laying out a toolbox of these common mechanisms.
 
Modern social science is so split between attempts at grand law-like theories and modest essays of careful description that Elsters third way seems alien and hard to comprehend. But there is a clear model that social scientists can look to: analytical philosophy.
 
Analytical philosophers do not take as their task grand law-like explanations for the world. Instead, they set upon a particular piece of conception  language, free will, ethics  and try to discover its logical structure. In doing so they often develop tools they shared in common with other philosophical projects.
 
This similarity can perhaps be best seen in the work of the man who is Jon Elsters closest equivalent in the world of analytical philosophy, John Searle. In his career, Searle has addressed a number of topics: language, intentionality, consciousness, social reality, and rationality. Throughout he has taken has his task providing a clear description of the phenomena and explaining the pieces it consists of. And in explaining those pieces, he frequently develops tools that he reuses in his other explanations.
 
Take the notion of direction of fit. Searle argues that all statements have a direction of fit, which can be either up, down, both, or null. If we imagine (by convention) that statements float above the world pointing down at the things they represent, then statements like John and Jill are married, in which it is the job of the statement to change to accurately represent the world, have a downward direction of fit. By contrast, statements like I want to marry him, in which it is the world must change to match the statement, have an upward direction of fit.
 
This notion, which Searle and Austin developed for describing language, Searle later reused for describing mental states. Love, for example, has an upward direction of fit, belief downward, and joy null. And in my own everyday life, I have found the same tool useful in thinking about various phenomena Ive encountered.
 
Social scientists dont seem to read much philosophy. I suspect most of them see it as an alien culture consisting of, as Paul Graham put it, either highly technical stuff that doesnt matter much, or vague concatenations of abstractions their own authors didnt fully understand. But perhaps they should, because even if the technical stuff lacks interest (and considering some of the topics involved, Im skeptical that this is always the case), the tools, and the way theyre wielded, should be a lesson.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 12, 2008
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 11, 2008
 
Title: The Toolbox Does Not Shrink
 

 
For the past forty years, Jon Elster has attempted to explain things ranging from the emotions to technological change. The result is dozens of books (and even more papers) in three languages across four universities. And throughout, his work has not just been exemplary social science, but has always struggled with the question of what social science should be  what kinds of explanations are legitimate, which techniques should be used, and so on.
 
As he reaches his late sixties, it is understandable if he begins to think of his legacy. That certainly would help explain his latest book, Explaining Social Behavior: More Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences (Cambridge University Press, 2007), a 500-page masterpiece that I expect will be seen as the summation of a brilliant career.
 
Its a book unlike any other and, as a result, unless read from start to finish can seem bizarre, if only because one has little sense of what the book is trying to do. It is not a guidebook, or a textbook, or a piece of social science in itself. In short, it is nothing less than an attempt to summarize an idealized vision of the whole of social science in simple language.
 
The books foundational assumption (as implied by its title) is that the goal of social science is to discover explanations for social phenomena. It begins by describing what explanations are and discussing their different forms. But the bulk of the book consists of tools that can be used in explanations: emotions, norms, time discounting, weakness of will, magical thinking, cognitive dissonance, heuristics and biases, rationality, irrationality, neuroscience, evolution, externalities, game theory, pluralistic ignorance, informational cascades, collective action, cyclical preferences, institutions, etc.  in short, the entire toolkit of the social sciences.
 
Just as amazing as the breadth topics is the way in which theyre covered. Elster explains each phenomenon clearly and concisely, so that any educated reader can understand them with little effort, without ever sacrificing intellectual depth. His explanations are peppered with examples from an amazing variety of sources: ancient history, recent history, personal experience, the classics of social science (e.g. Tocqueville), the great philosophers (Montaigne, Pascal, Mill), and classic novelists (e.g. Proust). The result is a book which not just introduces readers to the discoveries of the social sciences but to the intellectual world as a whole. Bibliographical notes following each chapter as well as the conclusion provide a rich guide for further exploration.
 
And yet its not simply a compendium of interesting results in the social sciences, but attempts to defend a particular conception of what the social sciences should be. In the conclusion, Elster defends his notion of social science as the attempt to discover particular explanations for particular phenomena against the soft obscurantism of the literary theorists and the hard obscurantism of the economists. As part of this, he turns his back on the notion of rational-choice models being an explanation in themselves, noting that their many assumptions are in desperate need of empirical defense.
 
In response to an earlier draft of this review, Elster wrote Im glad you appreciate the details in my book, but youre missing the big picture, which is that there isnt any. Instead of trying to build a Grand Theory which explains all of social life, we should try to build explanations of particular phenomena from the nuts and bolts we have lying around. And even if a dominant explanation of a given event or episode is discarded and then resurrected, the building blocks or mechanisms at work in the discarding and resurrection remain. The repertory, or the size of the toolbox, does not shrink.
 
For anyone who cares about social science, Elster has done an amazing service in clearly describing the toolboxs contents and defending its importance.
 
This is the first post of Elster week.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 11, 2008
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: April 20, 2008
 
Title: Money and Control
 
I never give money to those people, she said. Theyre only going to spend it on drugs, anyway. And whats so wrong with that?, I wondered. I can see why one might want to discourage Harvard students from spending all their time getting stoned (although, I have to say, I dont see anyone doing that), but if your life is spent sitting outside, hungry, cold, and miserable, drugs seem like a pretty decent use of the money.
 
But, more importantly, since when is that your call to make? That you live in a nice house with a bulging wallet and he lives on the street is due to an enormous number of random factors that could just as easily have been reversed. And even if youre arrogant enough to believe youre a better person in some way  smarter, harder-working, more ambitious  since when does being better give you the right to tell other people how to live their lives? Is Tiger Woods allowed to just come along and take the chocolate out of your shopping cart at the supermarket?
 
It is a sad fact of reality that you have money and he has none and that, as a result, he needs the money to buy material goods. But no moral consequences can be derived from this. Just because history has given you the power to choose whether this person can acquire certain material goods doesnt give you the right to make that call.
 
Now its true, you dont have to give him money at all. Most dont. But if you feel that other people deserve to live a life without privation, at least let them choose how to live that life.
 
Perhaps an example closer to home will help. Remember when your father offered to help you buy a house if only you went back to school? That was the same thing  trying to use the fact that he had money and you didnt in order to get you to do what he wanted. For years, hed been trying to get you to go back to school; and you didnt, because it was your decision and you didnt want to. But then he realized he could use the money to control you. Remember how that chafed?
 
At the time you brushed it off as his money, his call. But dont you see how thats not true? Whether you go to school or not was never his call. And while its certainly within his rights to help you buy a house, using that to try to and control you was wrong. You deserve to make your own choices about your life  we all do.
 
Including that man there.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 20, 2008
 
Hi Aaron,
 
While I struggle with the practical implications of your thoughts here, I cant argue much with the logic behind them.
 
I wonder, who is talking about the relationship between the logic of our actions regarding society, and the effects of those action? Perhaps Im getting at this question: on what basis should we evaluate our actions re: society? Logic? Emotion? Pragmatism? Social Darwinism?
 
Thanks for sharing your Thoughts
 
Steve
 
posted by Steve Ivy
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Just because history has given you the power to choose whether this person can acquire certain material goods doesnt give you the right to make that call.
 
If Im paying for the material goods, I feel like I should have a certain amount of power over what goods are purchased.  I have a moral opposition to drugs, and so therefore I wont dispense money unless I know for certain it wont be used for drugs.  Subsequently, I dont give money to bums that are likely to use it for drugs.
 
When you ask other people for money without giving something in return, you necessarily give up some of your rights to privacy and the usage of that money.  See: Food stamps, etc.  The person giving the money isnt trying to control the person receiving it, theyre just trying to make the most effective (morally and economically) usage of their money.
 
posted by Erik Peterson
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
But your Dad has the right to refuse money if you dont go back to school, right?
 
And thus she has the right to refuse money to people whom will use it to buy drugs, right?
 
Freedom, eh?
 
posted by Brett
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Erik: Thanks for sharing your feelings, but do you have any justification for them? You are trying to control someone thru the use of your money. You may consider that control effective, but at what?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
That you live in a nice house with a bulging wallet and he lives on the street is due to an enormous number of random factors that could just as easily have been reversed. And even if youre arrogant enough to believe youre a better person in some way  smarter, harder-working, more ambitious  since when does being better give you the right to tell other people how to live their lives?
 
But thats not really true.  What you seem to be saying is that in effect people are not responsible for their actions.  Sure, there are a whole bunch of random inheritances I got from my family, including both genes, prenatal health, etc. as well as cultural endowments like being taught to elevate certain behaviors over others, reading, learning, etc. as well as social endowments by being upper middle class.  In so far as any success I have as a direct relationship to these things without any reflection upon my choices and behaviors what you say is true.  But while these things help, they are clearly not the only thing that matters.
 
My mom came to this country when she was in her teens not speaking the language from a small down which didnt have schooling past 5th grade and became a doctor at a time when Women Werent Doctors.  There is a moral difference between doing that and coming from a similar place and not doing that.  One is better than the other, and the reason that it is so is because of the effort and the choices that someone made.  If my mom didnt fight to achieve then it wouldnt have happened.  If she wasnt as smart as she was or had a different temperament or different genes or different parents than it wouldnt happen.   If she was a paranoid schizophrenic then it wouldnt happen.
 
But there still is very clearly a difference.  Somethings are in your control, and you are responsible.  There is a moral dimension, especially when things are more-or-less equal.  If your homeless man is a mentally healthy individual who came from opportunities than, frankly, hes an asshole.  But this example is contrived, because most of the homeless I see (I live in NYC so thats at least 5 before i get to the office every morning) basically should be in an institution where they are fed and sheltered because they are sick, either mental illness or PTSD or something which we are being heartless by letting them suffer on their own.
 
Not everything is in your control; but quite a lot is.  History is not what gives people power, it is a combination of their circumstances and what they do with those circumstances, and thats where some people are better than others.  And by better, I mean better at playing the hands that they were dealt.  And to push the cards analogy further, you see the same faces at the last table of the poker tournaments.  So even if the hands are random, as they are in the games, the way and the skilled with which they are player dominates the results.  Not any sort of random acts of history.
 
So you have proved that you are better at living your live as someone else.  Ok, what gives you the right to tell anyone else?  Well, thats not really the situation.  The other person is asking for money, which means that the other person is not in fact acting independently.  The right of control is given when the person asks.  If they didnt ask for anything, then there is no right.  The right basically stems from the fact that the person who has the money or is giving something away is obligated to act morally; they are responsible for their actions.  And if giving you money encourages you to do something immoral or wrong, like say killing yourself with drugs (I actually dont care about drugs but when you are in a liquor store watching a homeless guy buy thunderbird in nickels and dimes and the guy behind the counter says something about needing to have their medicine you wonder who those assholes are who enable them to wallow in the street rather than say housing and feeding them), well, you cant shirk the responsibilities of your action having consequences.  And thats where the control imperative comes from.
 
posted by Will
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Im not trying to control a person through money, Im trying to control my own money, which I work to earn.  I dont think Im unreasonable for trying to direct the flow of my own money.
 
I think you have a drastically different view on the ownership of money than I do.
 
posted by Erik Peterson
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
I guess the point is: until I give it away, it is still my money. So if I am going to invest in a human, Id prefer to do it in a way that doesnt lead to more self destruction. I give money to things like the local food bank, and other local city projects that. If folks are really hungry, they know where to go.
 
Another way to look at it: a friend is in need of some money. Lets say health problems took their toll, and he or she is in the middle of rebuilding their life. While, I would support them in getting some improved quality of life over just simply surviving, I would not gift them money if they could barely pay their rent, and they are out buying the latest and greatest iPhone and skipping off to LA.
 
Ill gladly give me money away to help folks survive, but otherwise my extra money is for MY luxury, not theirs. So, I guess it is a pecking order. Someone elses survival, should be more important than my luxury, but your luxury will rarely, if ever, trump mine.
 
posted by KiltBear
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Are you really helping someone by feeding their habit?
 
Heres an idea: if theres a restaurant or food shop not too far from where you are, ask the person if theyre hungry and offer to buy them lunch / dinner. If its cold outside a soup and sandwich, or a meatball sub, can help.
 
posted by David Magda
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
i think there are few things at play here:
 
there will always be poor people.
 
there is a difference between being broke and being poor.
 
i agree with aaron that we should help other people because they are people.
 
being a person, however, does not mean that you deserve anyones help. if anything, its the other way around: being a person means you have a responsibility to help other people.
 
helping other people does NOT ONLY mean giving them money.
 
therefore, i think we have a responsibility to help the poor (and occasionally the broke). how we decide to do it, however, is our freedom.
 
i have never turned down someone asking for help in my city. but then, ive never given them cash, either. i always buy them food, and sometimes will even eat a meal with them.
 
and aaron, i have to agree with Brett: your example was ill-conceived. when you are asking your dad for money, and he says you have to go back to school, he hasnt removed free will from the equation. you can refuse to go back to school, and he can refuse to give you money. he owes you nothing. and you arent actually controlled by him.
 
turn your equation around. when your son asks you for money, because hes in debt and doesnt have money for beer and prostituteswill you give it to him? and how much? and for how long? somehow it seems youd draw a line somewhere. at some point youll look at your kid and say get a job, im not supporting you anymore. is that controlling his life? or is that simply being an adult?
 
posted by nic
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
I never give money to those people, she said. Theyre only going to spend it on drugs, anyway. And whats so wrong with that?, I wondered.
 
Could you seriously give a defense of a homeless person begging 20 dollars over the course of a day and then spending it all on heroin as a sensible or good use of the time or money of any of the people involved.  Under what value system is that a good outcome?
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Can you seriously give a defense of a banking CEO giving himself a multi-million dollar salary and spending it on yachts as a sensible or good use of the time or money of any of the people involved? There are lots of things people do with money that are probably less than ideal, but I dont get to tell them how to live their lives.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
I think Mr. Baker asked a straightforward question and you completely dodged it.  Id love to know about a banking CEO that giv[es] himself a multi-million dollar salary but that is off-topic.
 
Is control such a bad thing?  Imposing control on some homeless people sounds like a great idea to many people.  At least let them confront their addictions/mental issues, which are the overwhelming problems confronting the homeless, before you let them continue their negative patterns under their free will.
 
What is so horrible about control in general?  Sure, there are a number of parties I would not want controlling me.  There is nothing immoral about subsidizing an activity with some expectations or strings attached.  If you disagree, I expect you would percieve everyone as immoral which you seem to anyway.
 
posted by Jeremy Corbett
 on April 21, 2008 #
 
I recently had a similar conversation with some friends.  Im kind of with Aaron on this oneI dont base my decision on what I think a beggar will use money for; I spend money on alcohol, so why shouldnt he?  My problem with beggars is that they arent producing anything valuable, so I dont think they deserve my money.
 
I dont give money to people who simply ask for money, but I will almost always drop a dollar in someones hat whos singing a good song.  I feel like hes earned it by lifting my spirit with a song.
 
posted by Kortina
 on April 21, 2008 #
 
(Wish I had read your last post before this one before I posted my comment on this post.)
 
posted by Kortina
 on April 21, 2008 #
 
Hmm.  I quite felt my dad was correct to say that sort of thing, while I feel differently about people who ask me for money around the courthouse.
 
I guess I felt my dad had some responsibility which meant some right to attempt to use moral suasion, and I trusted my dad.
 
I dont expect a guy who is asking me for money to trust me and I dont feel that responsible for him.
 
Ill have to think more.  Am I enabling or not?  I hope not, but I think about it.  Cant help myself though.  There is the hope it will help if I give money, just as when Ive donated time at shelters to serve food.  One hopes.
 
posted by Stephen M (Ethesis)
 on April 21, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
I live in Chicago and we have a newspaper that is sold by homeless people looking to get back on their feet.  I buy the paper weekly.
 
However, what would be the best gift to give to these folks?  Is it money, is it volunteering at a shelter?  How can we change the dynamic?  Should we?
 
posted by Ziad
 on April 23, 2008 #
 
what would be the best gift to give to these folks?
 
Why not give them all the gifts you can? Im not sure what day-to-day part-of-your-job interactions programmers have with the poor, I suspect its not much. As an officer in the Navy, many of my sailors families qualified for food stamps. They are a hardy bunch but often at risk of loosing their housing. They didnt have good role models, in fact they often were surrounded by horrible role models. Molestors, drunks, abandoners. Quitters, jailhouse thugs, and the mentally disabled. The mentally disabled may be good people, but theyre bad role models if for no other reason than they are simply not emotionally consistent, reliable, predictable.
 
As a medical student, Ive seen the poor at their lowest. The mentally disabled at their worst: lying, seductive, violent, desperate, confused, fractured  floridly psychotic they call it. One man gouged out his sisters eye for talking back to him while he was raving in the street. Hes schizoaffective. He didnt know. He sells himself as a male prostitute to get money, a trade he learned in jail. But his sister is now also traumatized for life, and her children will no doubt be scarred emotionally, desperately wary of men, mental illness, or both. Ive seen a 40-year-old man come in to the ER to look over his 73-year-old mother whos somnolent and bleeding internally from dead bowel, the arteries clamped off for hours by the vasoconstrictive effect of cocaine. Ive seen a former Senate staffer turned schizoaffective. Why? Chance. Dormant genetics. Not her fault. Struck down from the seat of power at 35.
 
The ones that break my heart are the vets. Id like to know how many scruffy middle-aged men on street corners with cardboard vet signs are actually vets. I suspect most of them are. These were perfectly healthy and intelligent people before something devastated them, mentally, physically, spiritually. Many are travellers: emotionally disturbed, never treated, they wore out their families and were abandoned by the ones they loved. Their wives abandoned them to care for their children and they simply couldnt care for an apparently permanently broken husband as well. They roam from bed to bed, city to city. They favor the grain cars on trains: the long bucket-like cars have welded reinforcements at the ends where the bucket wedges inward at the bottom. The reinforcements form a cave-like structure with a little porch.
 
But before they wandered, before they were abandoned, theyre wrecked psyches made them terrible role models for those children. Who then either sort it out or dont. The outcome probably depends most on the length of exposure.
 
Other vets were never abandoned by their families. They had no families. Unfit for duty, they were discharged and walked across the blue line on the curb, bag in hand. Too embarrassed or unable to go home, they wander.
 
Heroin is an opiate. It relieves pain. Its a favored drug of the poor. Cocaine and meth give the user a feeling of strength, power. The power to meet their fathers expectations. The power to turn the next trick so at least theyll make the rent. Until the money gets spent on the next hit. Alcohol, its a little liquid courage to make a bold step and talk to the girl. We all experience a degree of pleasure in overcoming that little challenge. Unfortunately, it seems a number of alcoholics may actually derive too much pleasure, too much dopamine. They can experience pleasure an order of magnitude greater than most of us. They dont know that. You dont know that. But they quickly associate the liquid courage with the intense pleasurable dopamine payoff, and take to it like fish, with all the expected terrible other consequences.
 
Somewhere in society there is a shift from goods begetting goods to problems begetting problems. The people have so many problems, theres no point in fixing the first one, like a car with too many dents to fix. Children who are born into these broken homes and escape are in a very real way lucky: the random events in their lives added up to shape their decision-making process and early actions in such a way that they accidentally fall across the divide and begin to be net contributors. It is little wonder some of them are revolted by their past and rail against poverty and the poor work ethic of the poor. But its hard to appreciate the flip-side: that theyre the one car that got out of the wrecker derby unscathed. The rest are too dented.
 
Keep in mind, people dont generally live on the street for years. Not truly on the street. Those who run out their welcome at every half-way house, every shelter, they die.
 
On the flip side, there is also a significant value to each of us taking action. In time, money, quantity, quality, adding something to these peoples lives. People turn themselves around. They do. Believe it or not, beggars may be on their way up. These are people who, through mental illness, lack of education, lack of mental capacity, or their own past poor choices are likely living moment to moment. Theyve been forced to admit, probably in the last minute, and maybe 60 times in the last hour, that they have nothing and no way of bootstrapping themselves to even the faintest of goals without some minimum amount of money. At that moment, the moment you are before them, theyre not getting high enough to do the next deed. Theyre not sleeping in the alley. Theyre not beating their kids (those are probably long gone). They might be resigned, they might have been playing trumpet yesterday until they woke up this morning and found their trumpet stolen. In that moment, Ill just about garuntee their plan is not to buy drugs or alcohol or anything except a cab to their sons house to apologize, or to the ER to get paracentesis for their hepatitis. Or food. But they probably are practical and with it enough to realize that you might have cash, but you probably dont have a can of Campbells in your car. And they really dont want anyone throwing a can of Campbell at them. The coins and their feet hurt plenty enough. They might be asking for money, but in truth theyre asking for something. Anything. Please.
 
What value system seriously argues against charity?
 
Give to poor. There but for the grace of chance go you.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on April 23, 2008 #
 
Just because history has given you the power to choose whether this person can acquire certain material goods doesnt give you the right to make that call.
 
Would I be right in generalizing your comment to be, It is immoral to use power to influence people?
 
Or is that too general?
 
posted by Gordon McNutt
 on May  8, 2008 #
 
Your post reads like I should have to give the man money (because you say so, effectively).  Now whos being controlling?  Youre entitled to your opinion as much as the next guy.  However, when your opinion is no more than, I think you ought to give money to street people, I think you should expect flack.
 
Tell you what  Go find a homeless person who cant read, and teach them to read.  Because I said so.  No, really.  You can read, so what right do you have to let them stew in their illiteracy?  And not just that one illiterate person you passed this morning  you (personally) have to teach all of them, because they all need it.
 
In response to Erik, you wrote, You /are/ trying to control someone thru the use of your money.  And what, exactly, are you trying to do, through the use of your blog?  Control others, Id wager.
 
posted by Random Passerby
 on May 10, 2008 #
 
I usually dont give money to anyone that I dont know.  I dont give money to charities.  Through my life I usually havent had a lot of money to give money to help street beggars, although sometimes it tugs your heart strings to see them.  And from the statistics, most people a NOT mentally handicapped or drugged up.  What they are is mothers with little children, veterans, people like you and I who were doing just fine one day and the next they lost the job, their marriage, their health, their house.  What I do, if someone is in distress, is to lend a hand.  I usually help someone (even a stranger) who is stranded with a flat tire.  I have, several times, given a ride to a hitch hiker.  I usually open the door for the person behind me.  If a someone is depressed or has lost loved one, I linger a little to see if they need someone to listen.  If a person is been overwhelmed, I have babysat for an afternoon or helped clean their house.  If someone is beaten from a spouse, I listen to them and offer some counsel, or a place to stay if they seem they need that.  One time a coworker was in fear of his job, so I went to the boss to try to keep his job (didnt work).  Another person, who was in pain, needed me to drive her to the doctor.  I payed for the doctors bill because he wouldnt see her without payment.  So far, the people that I have known, most of them didnt seem to want handouts, they just want some kindly and thoughtful advice, a job, someone to talk to, a way to make it, a little respect.  Everything you do has an effect on someone else.
 
posted by kathy
 on June  8, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: April 20, 2008
 
Title: Money and Worth
 
The streets of San Francisco are lined with poor people looking for a
little spare change. Many different strategies are tried  some just
shake a jar, others call for help, some make specific small requests,
and a fellow I saw today just kept sunnily repeating a nickel and a
smile will last a long while in an endearing tone. Others, however, try
to earn their keep  playing music, doing tricks, selling special
papers like Spare Change.
 
I have a strong urge to help out the first group, those who simply ask,
but helping the second has always struck me as odd. People tell me that
its better if the poor receive their money by doing work, because it
lets them retain some dignity, but Ive never quite bought that. After
all, how much dignity do you get when your income comes from people
patronizingly pretending to buy a newspaper specially created for this
ruse?
 
But theres a much more serious problem with only giving the poor money
for doing things. It encourages them to think their worth as a person is
defined by their success in the capitalist economy.
 
Now there is a grain of truth to this delusion. There are many useful
jobs for which society can compensate you. (Although even that, frankly,
requires a level of non-useful skill at fitting into the general
capitalist system.) But thats about it. There are many useful jobs that
society doesnt compensate well. There are many useful people who cant
do any of those jobs because society never trained them or gave them the
opportunities required. And even if, perchance, there existed someone
who cannot and even with training and opportunity could not do anything
useful, it seems clear to me that their simple existence as a human
being endows them with some inalienable value. (If human beings didnt
have value, then we would have no one to do useful things for.)
 
People on the street dont deserve our money because they can pretend to
do certain menial jobs. Nor should their sense of dignity be bound up in 
doing them. Instead they, like everyone else, deserve our money because
they are people and if we cannot care for other people, then we have
precious little else.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 20, 2008
 
Thank you for this post.  This is an amazingly lucid and compassionate exploration of human values, dignity and our ways of caring for each other.
 
posted by Amy
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
I completely agree that the Street Spirit / Spare Change delusion doesnt really help anyone, and that it is simply better to help a fellow denizen out of the goodness of the act.
 
Lets not throw this  upon the capitalist pyre just yet.  Having a reason to get up in the morning and a way to contribute to society, whether for financial, social or personal gain, to feel that you matter in some way, to some one,  is all weve really got, so the real question is how to you provide baseline subsistence so people dont have to make the motions of contribution and not require, but rather encourage a rich, active, not necessarily capitalist life.
 
Ive got no answers.
 
posted by Dan
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
People dont deserve our money. Human beings, however, do deserve our respect as human beings. Equating respect with giving them money is, if I am reading this entry correctly, your mistake.
 
I think the direction your thoughts take on this sound very much what I understand co-dependence to be. Most peoples situations are of their own making. If you insist that there is now way you can know what they have been through, I would half agree with you, but I would also point out that assuming that they have no control over their lives is condescending and says how little you think of them.
 
They deserve a chance, they deserve a break, they deserve opportunity, they deserve real hope that can actually bear(bare?) success. Unfortunately, if handouts to someone in your home-town compares to the global handouts to places like Africa, I think the current zeitgeist is that we are learning that handouts of any sort tend to be destructive.
 
posted by KiltBear
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
heres the problem:
 
weve made this a moral discussion.
 
it is well within your moral rights to simply donate money to people on the street without expecting anything in return.
 
and it is certainly a moral thing to recognize the innate value in every human being.
 
but it is impractical to start assuming that just because the action is moral, means that you have to do it all the time.
 
if you made it mandatory for yourself to walk through the city each evening and gave $20 to every beggar you saw, youd be making a moral decision. and a positive one at that.
 
but how long do you think youd survive on what you had left? my guess is youd end up begging on the street yourself before too long. how does that help them, really?
 
i think giving money to the poor is good. but i think there are other things that can be done that are even better: where i live, i sometimes help out RIFA, a charity that offers free computer classes, job placement services, a food bank, temporary lodging, and a host of other services aimed directly at helping people lift themselves out of poverty.
 
maybe thats fanatically capitalistic of them.
 
or maybe theres more to helping the poor than tossing cash at them.
 
posted by nic
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Aaron, you write like someone who has been much loved in his life.
 
This is, sadly, more the exception than the rule.
 
if we cannot care for other people, then we have precious little else.
 
Thats a laudable sentiment, but it doesnt pay the rent, buy food, get medical care, etc.
 
Its also unconvincing to anyone who isnt already convinced (to a good approximation).
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
I recently spent some time in San Francisco.  I was amazed at the number of people giving money to beggars.  I even saw a man give his daughter a dollar bill to take to the panhandler to put in his hat.
 
In London this is much less common.  Although it does still happen (otherwise we wouldnt have beggars).
 
Westminster City Council and The Big Issue (our very successful equivalent of Spare Change) recently ran a large advertising campaign asking Londoners not to give money to homeless people begging on the street 
 
Are you killing with kindness?  The money you give to those who beg may actually keep them on the streets. In some cases you may be helping them buy drugs that could kill them.  http://www.killingwithkindness.com/
 
I think the idea of the Big Issue (and Spare Change?) is that they vet sellers of the paper in some way so that you can be a lot more sure that your contribution is  constructive (as long as you make sure you are buying from a badged vendor).
 
On a personal note I havent given any money to beggars since I gave five pounds to a young man with a convincing line about needing to get into a hostel for the night whom I saw shooting up later the same night.
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Equating respect with giving them money is, if I am reading this entry correctly, your mistake.
 
Thats pretty much what I was thinking.
 
Id say another mistake is thinking theres anything simple about asking for money. It takes a lot of persuasive skill to convince people to give. Whether its asking or singing, youre rewarding a performance either way. The former group is just so talented at performing that it looks effortless to you.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Aaron says:
 
if we cannot care for other people, then we have precious little else.
 
Seth follows:
 
Thats a laudable sentiment, but it doesnt pay the rent, buy food, get medical care, etc.
 
Not only is Aarons statement laudable, it is common sense. Are you saying, Seth, that if we care for societys most destitute, we all lose?
 
posted by Peter Rock
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
I think that simply giving money to people on the street is not the best use of resources.  Gifts and other sporadic donations to homeless/jobless folks, regardless of need, doesnt seem to address the structural issues that put them on the street in the first place.  As mentioned, the sporadic and completely undependable frequency/quantity doesnt leave much room for Tomorrow, only Now.
What concerns me is that if we enable these individuals to remain on the street, how do we move them from the street to a self-sufficient/supported lifestyle?
 
That isnt to say, Epic Fail because they havent succeeded in the capilatlist economy and therefore should be ignored, or allowed to freeze in the street [I suppose that isnt such a problem in San Fran as Toronto?].
 
Resources, which are most likely hard to find, or already stretched to the limit, are, in my opinion, a better use of the money which may otherwise end up in the hands of street beggars; food programs, accessible housing, out of the cold [or the equiv. for you tropical folk], job search/creation services, and many more.
 
posted by Chad
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Chad says:
 
Gifts and other sporadic donations to homeless/jobless folks, regardless of need, doesnt seem to address the structural issues that put them on the street in the first place.
 
I agree though while structural solutions are absent, I see nothing wrong with sporadic giving - even if the receiver sometimes puts the gift to unproductive use.
 
posted by Peter Rock
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Chad: Does anyone actually say Hmm, I could give some spare change to this fellow, or I could donate it to a nonprofit working to solve the structural problems that cause homelessness? I doubt it. I think most people could easily do both.
 
That said, Id love to hear recommendations for San Francisco and Boston groups addressing structual causes of homelessness to donate to.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Minor nit Aaron. The poor creates IMHO negative images. I was strafed by a blind guy for talking about the blind as a generic group. We are people, who happen to be blind, sort of puts the emphasis where it should be. People first.
 
Funny how you are one of the clever doesnt work, yet, hes one of the poor does. Derogatory? Im not sure.
 
Thoughtful post though.
 
posted by Dave Pawson
 on April 20, 2008 #
 
Peter: Im saying that while homilies are fine, they also are very limited. While it is not wrong to preach them, it also is not all that productive either. Many people go around saying some variant of The best society is when everyone acts their best.
Okay, right. But theres very many local incentives for people to be selfish bastards. Now what?
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on April 21, 2008 #
 
Make no mistake, you are advocating violence here. People who think they have a right to take my money and give it to others, would best be prepared to eat lead.
 
posted by Jim
 on April 23, 2008 #
 
Aaron: not sure what meets your definition of addressing structual causes of homelessness, but I can say that Womens Lunch Place, in Boston, does a great job of providing resources for specific homeless women to get back on their feet, and would make good use of any donations.
 
http://womenslunchplace.org
 
posted by Joe
 on June 10, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: April 15, 2008
 
Title: Slaves of Some Dead Sociologist
 
Imagine you were suddenly put in charge of Google. What would you spend your time doing? Branding? The Google brand is pretty important, but its not really something you can control directly; its more of a side-effect of the other decisions you make. (If your legal team decides to give up the names of Chinese dissidents to the secret police, thats going to hurt your brand.) Product design? Clearly this is also important, but at a company the size of Google its too big a job for one person  most of Googles innovative new products are designed by rank-and-file engineers. Strategy? This is a good one, and probably what Googles current rulers spend most of their time on, but Im skeptical as to how good anyone can really be at long-term strategy with such a huge company. Hiring? Obviously hiring is pretty important, but even the greatest group of people arent going to save your company if they waste their time once their inside.
 
No, I think the most important thing a person in charge of a large company can work on is sociology  designing the social structure of the company. Its the sociology that determines who gets hired, what their life is like, how much freedom they have, what sorts of things they work on, etc. Clearly these structures determine an enormous amount about the corporation. And yet, strikingly, Ive never heard of a single corporation that has a high-level group devoted to studying and improving them.
 
Practical men, Keynes famously wrote at the end of his General Theory,  who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. And sociology seems to have worked out much the same way. Chandler claims that the modern command-and-control corporation was worked out just about identically by several different people around the same time and its military methods have been with us ever since.
 
Despite enormous changes in the kinds of things big companies do as well as in the way that they do them, the actual structure of the large corporation (with very few exceptions) has hardly changed at all. Its gotten to the point where even tinkering with the cubicle seems radical.
 
Since such questions are so alien, let me give a sense of the questions I mean. For example, how do you hire? Right now, it appears that at Google each team gets to hire people for its projects and then once youre inside Google you get to switch to another project if you like. Why not have a team dedicated to hiring which tries to find the best way to pick the best people as well as making sure they match a particular company culture?
 
Also, how do projects get picked? Do you have a command-and-control structure deciding what things need to get worked on from the top? Do you let everybody work on what they like? Do you let the company vote on what its priorities should be?
 
What do you do with people who dont work out? Do you have performance reviews? Bonus pay? Three-strikes firing offenses? Or do all these systems just make working more frightening and problematic?
 
It seems to me any reasonable company ought to have a whole department dedicated to working on these issues, studying the systems that are in place, studying the kinds of things that others have tried, and doing their own experiments to see if they can do things better. And yet, to my knowledge, no one does. Even the handful of companies that do something innovative with their corporate structure did it as a one-off  they have no team dedicated to coming up with and trying new such innovations.
 
Now normally when you discover that everyone else is doing something wrong, theres an opportunity for you to get ahead by doing it right. But thats much more difficult here, because these questions only really make sense for large organizations and very few of us find ourselves in charge of large organizations. For example, its arguable that Fog Creek has done some things along these lines, but its pretty difficult to tell since theyve never had more than a couple dozen people.
 
Instead, the real innovation hasnt come from companies, but the online peer-production projects, like GNU/Linux, that take contributions from a distributed set of volunteer contributors. But such groups solve the problem largely through eliminating it  they dont have to worry about who to hire and how to treat them because they dont hire anyone.
 
Instead, most of the people who work on GNU/Linux are hired by other companies where they must contend with the antiquated social structures that those companies provide. And since those are the brutal facts that most humans must contend with, it would be nice if more people were thinking about alternatives.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 15, 2008
 
I have been thinking about this kind of a thing a lot as of late, too. Have you heard of Ricardo Semler and his book Maverick? Im not sure it is worth the read, yet, but to get a gist:
 
http://youtube.com/watch?v=gJkOPxJCN1w
http://youtube.com/watch?v=gG3HPX0D2mU
 
What do you think about such approaches to managing (software) companies?
 
posted by rz
 on April 15, 2008 #
 
This probably gets lumped into the strategy category a lot.
 
There is a lot of variety in corporate structure. Goldman Sachs is a (recently and historically successful) example, their organization does not have many levels of management, Usually there have been no more than two layers to the top from http://www.simonsays.com/content/book.cfm?pid=411146&tab=25&agid=2
 
Another strategy is Napoleon style decentralization, which is not new obviously, Walmart got a lot of praise for its hurricane Katrina response, compared to FEMA which is organized more conventionally.
 
A major demotivator is risk. The more risk a company takes the more expensive capital is, so the more money they have to make to stay afloat. I think there are a lot of people out there that are happy just to have a decent job that pays the bills.
 
posted by 15801703843
 on April 15, 2008 #
 
aaron,
 
most people who get to in charge of large organizations are very focused and have lots of energy, and have spent their whole lives proving it. Then they get those first couple of really big jobs  dean, president, whatever, and their same I-will-be-the-one-to-fix-it attitude cant let them believe they cant change the culture of the place. A year or two later, most of them admit they failed to change the culture of the institution and they try to recover and make some small, focused changes. I have seen it happen again and again. Most often the ones who do manage to make a change tend verge on luck: the right ambition in the right job at the right time. The bottom line is, no matter how important the CEO is, hes not very important compared to 10,000 other people. Hes just not. The best ones, I think, have been the ones who dug in and made changes at the funding level, but I have also seen such folks taken down by bitter infighting.
 
As for the experimentation: what do you think the Human Resources department does? The popularized employee interface with HR as an employee is the interface a rat has with the scientist: youre in the experiment. The HR senior management, especially in larger organizations, is in the role of scientist. Ive run the data on some of those experiments.
 
As for alternatives, check out Chris Algyris and some of the industrial efficiency experts. These people were driven by data and I think youll find that their best insights have been overlooked by the easy-to-understand ideas that got popularized, much to their authors chagrin.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on April 16, 2008 #
 
Ive also been thinking quite a lot recently about what it takes to build a great/lasting company.  I sort of got stuck on the hiring good people part, because to me even that is a quite difficult task.  Everyone is motivated and excited by different things, and the best people are harder to motivate and excite than others, so finding and keeping them is a daunting task.
 
Having a team of people asking the questions you discuss here is a brilliant idea.
 
posted by Kortina
 on April 18, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: April 14, 2008
 
Title: Welcome, watchdog.net
 
As youve probably noticed, its political insanity season in the US. I can hardly go outside these days without running into someone complaining about the latest piece of campaign gossip. Ive mostly tried to keep it off this blog, but its hard to not get swept up in the fever. As someone who wants to make a difference in the world, Ive long wondered whether there was an effective way for a programmer to get involved in politics, but Ive never been able to quite figure it out.
 
Well, recent events and Larry Lessig got me thinking about it again and Ive spent the past few months working with and talking to some amazing people about the problem. Ive learned a lot and must have gone through a dozen different project ideas, but I finally think Ive found something. Its not so much a finished solution as a direction, where I hope to figure more of it along the way.
 
So the site is called watchdog.net and the plan has three parts. First, pull in data sources from all over  district demographics, votes, lobbying records, campaign finance reports, etc.  and let people explore them in one elegant, unified interface. I want this to be one of the most powerful, compelling interfaces for exploring a large data set out there.
 
But just giving people information isnt enough; unless you give them an opportunity to do something about it, it will just make them more apathetic. So the second part of the site is building tools to let people take action: write or call your representative, send a note to local papers, post a story about something interesting youve found, generate a scorecard for the next election.
 
And tying these two pieces together will be a collaborative database of political causes. So on the page about global warming, youll be able to learn more about the problem and proposed solutions, research the donors and votes on the issue, and see or start a letter-writing campaign.
 
All of it, of course, is free software and free data. And its all got a dozen different APIs to make it easy for others to build on what weve done in their own work. The goal is to be a hub, connecting citizens, activists, organizations, politicians, programmers, and everybody else whos interested in politics.
 
The hope is to make it as interesting and easy as possible to pull people into politics. Its an ambitious goal with many pieces and possibilities, but with all the excitement right now we want to get something up as fast as possible. So well be developing live on watchdog.net, releasing pieces as soon as we finish them. Our first goal is to put up data about every representative and a way to write them.
 
Ive managed to find an amazing group of people willing to help out with building it so far. And the Sunlight Network has encouraged me and graciously agreed to fund it. But we still need many more hands, especially programmers. If youre interested in working on it, whether as a volunteer or for pay, please send me an email  me@aaronsw.com  telling me what youd like to help with.
 
We only officially started work yesterday, so theres not much up yet, but hopefully itll give you a sense of where were going:
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 14, 2008
 
Aaron, congrats on taking charge of such an important project.
 
I saw on the website that you guys are hiring. Would it be required that job applicants to be US-citizens?
 
posted by Raphael Lullis
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
I saw on the website that you guys are hiring. Would it be required that job applicants to be US-citizens?
 
Nope. Our current crew of programmers is one US citizen living abroad and one Indian citizen living here.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
UK has had this for ages: http://www.theyworkforyou.com/ http://www.writetothem.com/
 
posted by .
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
Im sure you know them already but I second taking a look at theyworkforyou.com and writetothem.com  very, very well made sites with fantastic information.  A lot of their (MySociety) code is available although I expect it is mostly UK-specific scrapers.
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
If youre looking for a possibly useful idea:
 
At one point I was trying to determine what the current set of laws were. Unfortunately, I couldnt find an up to date version of say the constitution - because politicians approve bills that perform changes like:
 
take word 4 of the constitution section A, and change it to thee
 
It might be useful to turn these bills into DIFFs, and treat these documents are initial versions - that way youd be able to see the growth of federal documents.
 
posted by Warren
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
I always thought it would be useful to have a site track promises (and forecasts) made by politicians.
 
If someone makes a promise or boldly asserts something, it would be nice to make an entry into a website which was attached to a timer event, so that at the designated point in the future, the event surfaces up to anyone interested enough to subscribe to the data stream for that politician or topic.
 
From there, some sort of voting system could make the more interesting ones bubble to the front page.
 
There are a lot of reasons why this would be useful, but Ill keep this post short: you want to keep politicians honest, and you want to give the populace a better long term memory. Maybe this will cause politicians to stop optimizing for the short-term.
 
posted by Alex
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
I would third looking at the projects MySociety[0] run.
 
[Footnote 0: http://www.mysociety.org/]
 
posted by Daniel Watkins
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
Im glad you put the code on github (it could be another public repository though), its worth a look and for sure worth a hack.
 
Cheers,
 
posted by Yoan
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
Please take a look at this fascinating presentation by Hans Rosling:
 
http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/view/id/92
 
I believe that if the ONLY goal of your project were to centralize data and most importantly to present it and organize it, connect it in a powerful and expressive way, that that would be something great.
 
I hope I might be able to help in some small way in the future.
 
posted by JB
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
You might also be interested in http://govtrack.us/
 
posted by Brad
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
Since youll be working with the Sunlight Foundation, I assume youve heard of OpenCongress (http://opencongress.org)? They have a very nicely designed site and some great people (the same group that works on Miro).
 
And Im not sure if youre planning for this, but a system like watchdog could also be really useful outside of the US  many other societies have similar issues with keeping track of what politicians are up to.
 
posted by Artur
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
I think you should link up with the ChangeCongress movement.
 
http://change-congress.org/
 
posted by 
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
As a progammer who got involved in politics - and got driven out by politics - my take is Its really hard, and you [generic] are out of your area of expertise.
 
Though its certainly not a bad things per se to make database tools.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on April 15, 2008 #
 
Seth - Thats I think everyone would be interested to hear more about what you mean. You should write a blog post up, if you have not already.
 
It might help to have the right expectations going in. Maybe all Aaron should focus on is extracting and presenting data, at least to start.
 
I think any software that makes political action easier should be on a different site. Even if its heavily linked into watchdog.net via widgets or an API. It just seems a bit disjoint to be the same website whats next, a social network? Its too much for one site, and they should be spread out.
 
It also means that if the programmers of this political action site fall to cynicism, the main data representation site is unscathed.
 
posted by Alex
 on April 16, 2008 #
 
Big kudos to you, Aaron.  What a worthy cause for a project!
 
And hey, Id also recommend that you check out www.factcheck.org.  Quite an insightful, valuable site, and possibly a great one to pair up with.
 
posted by Adam
 on April 16, 2008 #
 
Alex, I actually wrote lots of blog posts chronicling my experiences on the topic. Nobody read them (to a first-order approximation). This one is perhaps the best single post:
 

DMCA Exemptions Diary, a.k.a. more Why I Quit Censorware Research (Or, as a subtitle, I tried it that way, and it didnt work).
 
Oversimplified, if youre making meaningful change, somebodys going to push back at you. If nobodys pushing back at you, thats a strong indication that what youre doing is not going to affect the powers-that-be.
 
Again, though, theres nothing wrong with service sites. Rather, its that theyre just a tiny, tiny, part of a very big picture.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on April 16, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 16, 2008
 
Title: Banff
 

 
When you step off the plane in Calgary, there are, rather improbably, men in cowboy hats. Albertans consistently refer to their province as the Texas of Canada and apparently its largest city has taken the notion to heart.
 
I take a ride with a man who appears to have spent his life preparing to be the consummate businessman. His handshake is firm, his knowledge of geopolitics impeccable. He is a master of the telling anecdote, the commanding voice, the comprehensive but guarded answer. He has built planes, been in bands, managed corporate strategy, and now he is on assignment in Mexico, where he must staff up a factory to build planes for a Canadian business that is wary of such offshoring.
 
He has gone, he explains, from a life in which he researches technicalities for position papers on corporate strategy to one life in which he gets up every morning, drives to a factory, locks the doors (to punish latecomers), walks the line, and tries to figure out how to get airplanes built and delivered.
 
As we drive, he demonstrates his radio contact to the folks back home in Mexico. Right now they are trying to figure out how to get a plane body they have built from Mexico to Canada in time for additional construction to begin on Monday morning without breaking any laws in the complicated patchwork of trucking regulations.
 
I feel endlessly inferior to this confident man of business, until I discover he knows very little about technology or copyright law. He does understand, however, that Google must be very popular, as he visits it at least two or three times a day. I try to contribute something back by attempting to explain some things about the subject, although I talk too fast and dont explain enough, so Im not sure much was clear.
 
It is a long drive past a short skyline to Banff, a city that literally resides inside a national park, one which requires a permit to enter and in which no new construction is permitted.
 
Tourism most certainly is, however, and the city is dotted with hotels and conference centers nestled into the sides of imposing mountains, with glorious vistas in all directions. The hotel I am staying at is almost comically opulent, with a Roaring 20s theme of sparkling black gowns amidst weak white art deco lights. My room is huge.
 

 
At check in I am given my badge and binder and hat and vest. There is a party that night at the bar. I want to soak up the discussions, to see how the elite live and what they discuss, but I am too shy to barge into any of the conversations. It is just like any other party: I sit against the wall and try to remain inconspicuous.
 
The next morning I am scheduled to give a brief talk to this self-described group of young leaders of Canada. Taking the stage after the platitudes of a high-ranking Albertan government official, I find myself on a panel on the Internet and Mass Collaboration (the one technology panel at the conference) and am asked to give five minutes of provocative thoughts. In a bright red t-shirt amongst a sea of suits, I approach the podium:
 
I suppose Im here to be the brash young person from San Francisco. Ill try my best to fill that role. For years Ive been a user and a builder of these technologies. Most recently, I co-founded Reddit, a democratic news site which was purchased by the magazine publisher Cond Nast, and I am now working on Open Library, an attempt to create a Wikipedia for books. []
 
Theres a lot of talk, here and elsewhere, about how Internet collaboration is going to revolutionize business and politics. Just add some Internet collaboration, they say, and your business will suddenly start working better and smarterand cheaper, as well. But the Internet is not this magic pixie dust you can sprinkle on anything. In the States, the back of every ketchup bottle now has a notice explaining that you can now create your own advertisements for the ketchup company. In return, well, in return they might use your ad. This is magic pixie dust thinking at work: people are not going to suddenly start designing your ad campaigns for you just because you asked them to.
 
We have to remember that these things are done by real people, not magical abstractions. The rhetoric often suggests that some magical force of peer production or mass collaboration has written an encyclopedia or created a video library. Such forces do not exist; instead there are only individual people, the same kind of people who drive everything else.
 
The power is that these people are collaborating. But they are collaborating because they have come together to form a community. And a community works because it has shared values. But heres the thing: these shared values are profoundly anti-business. [Laughs from the audience.] I mean, look at Wikipedia. This is a group who wakes up every day and tries to put the encyclopedia publishers out of business by providing a collection of world knowledge they can give away to everyone for free.
 
If you want someone to do your companys work for you, finding a well-organized online community with strong anti-business values seems like a bad idea. [Laughs.]
 
So what do you do? I have a friend who is even more brash than I am and when anyone asks her for business advice she tells them simply: Well, in the future, your servants are going to rise up and eat you. So, invest in toothpicks.
 
I quickly scurry back to my seat, afraid this crowd will rise up and eat me for such brazen aggressiveness. But instead, I am cheered with laughter and applause. Nobody ever addresses my toothpicks comment. For the next hour, me and the rest of the panel answer questions from the audience, and I comfortably talk about everything from the gender gap in technology (which, I assure them, is worse than in any other field and a result of the most disgusting discrimination and misogyny) to the future of news (freelancers and aggregators, not institutions).
 
Afterward, and for the next few days, dozens of people come up to compliment me on my talk. So you do this sort of thing a lot then? they all say. I receive three more speaking invitations before lunch and people repeatedly request to sit next to me at meals.
 

 
I spend a great deal of time with Michael Geist and his family. Geist is invariably referred to as the Lawrence Lessig of Canada. A law professor in the countrys capital, he writes a weekly column and gives frequent speeches on technology policy (copyright law, net neutrality, open spectrum, etc.). But unlike Lessig, who has an otherworldly aura of fame about him, Geist is entirely down-to-earth, continually expressing genuine shock at how boneheaded and awful his opponents in industry and government are. While I spend most of the rest of the time explaining things to people, I have to work hard to avoid doing that with Geist  he either knows intimately or has actually worked on every relevant thing I can think to mention.
 
After our panel is a panel on work-life balance, mostly dominated by James Milway, director of the Institute for Competiveness and Prosperity. There are two other women on the panel to balance him, but Milway speaks with such booming confidence and authority that the other panelists comments seem to just disappear. Milway says everything youd expect a right-wing economist to say: Canadians arent working hard enough, theyre not working long enough, they keep spending time doing silly things like increasing the minimum wage and engaging in rent control which are just obviously wrong. Increasing vacation time will just lead to fewer workers getting hired. This is all clear in our regressions. Europes economies are dying; workers there are far unhappier. And so on.
 
Afterwards I go up to him to argue with his economics. Youre using the standard economic assumption that the demand curve for labor slopes downard, I say. (This is economese for the concept that as you raise the cost of hiring someone, people hire less.) But every study on this subject  from Card and Krueger to Michael Manning  finds that this simply isnt the case. Mannings monsopony model, in which you take into account that there are significant costs to changing jobs, finds that all of your results no longer follow.
 
Milway is a fast speaker and has boundless energy and he tries to talk right over me. Everyeveryhold on thereeveryalmost alltheres a strong consensus in economics that raising the minimum wage is a bad idea, he finally gets out. Sure, I say, but theyre wrong  when you actually look at the studies thats just not true. No, theres a strong body of studieseven in our regressions we find that. We argue for a while about the validity of the Card and Krueger work and he finally asks, Whats the argument for the opposite case? Why would employers do that? I try to explain the Manning model but halfway through realize I dont fully understand it. So I switch tacks.
 
Look at what Card found when he was doing his research  employers were happy to raise non-wage benefits to get employees but just refused to raise wages, even when more employees would have made them more money. They werent being economically rational. Well, there you go, he says, as if hes won the argument. If you dont think people behave rationally then were done.
 
But of course people dont behave rationally! I squealed. Look at all the research in behavioral economics  its blatantly obvious people dont behave rationally. Well then, you might as well throw away the whole field of economics! he shouted. Precisely. Im glad you agree  economics is bogus. He just laughed and stormed off, but not before giving me a working paper from his institute.
 
We ended up sitting near each other at lunch. He was explaining that his institute was completely funded by the Ontario government but remained strictly independent. So howd you get the government to fund a right-wing think tank? I asked. He laughed. Well, normally Id say were more middle-of-the-road, but I guess youre right, we are pretty right-wing. I dont know. Harris [the previous major premier of Ontario] started us but [the current one] loves us too.
 

 
That night there was a talk by Rory Stewart, the other person I got to know and enjoy at the conference. Stewart is an amazing fellow. An incredibly handsome man, with a perfect British accent and the most well-tailored suits, he nonetheless has the look of something otherworldly about him. His face is pulled back and marked as if hes seen things no one in a suit that nice was meant to see. I adored him from the first.
 
He somehow got it in his head to walk across Afghanistan and his talk consisted of photos and descriptions of this incredible journey. he begun in a major city and walked for years, depending almost entirely on the hospitality of strangers in each town to keep him alive and moving. He walked every day, through deserts and snowstorms, with company and without. And what he found was an incredibly kind people, living in terribly poor conditions in autonomous villages, with a passionate faith in their religion (including such rules as keeping women out of site).
 
Stewart now runs an NGO in Kabul, which is doing the work that the coalition forces in the country found too low-priority to do: clear seven feet of garbage from the streets, build thriving businesses and shops in the downtown district, and prepare commercial products for import and export. Stewart spoke bluntly about the military mission and the government, suggesting it was unlikely to do much good.
 
It was 11pm by the time the discussion was over, so I went straight to bed.
 
The next morning was dedicated to addressing the most pressing issue in foreign policy, perhaps overall: whether we should bring the troops home instead of continuing to lose their lives maintaining an increasingly violent occupation in a country we originally invaded under the guise of fighting terrorism but in which we now remain because we fear it will fall apart if we will leave. This being Canada, that country is Afghanistan.
 
The day started with a passionate speech by the Afghanistan Minister for Education, who pleaded for us to let the country take control of its own affairs and to ensure its greedy neighbors (widely agreed to be a euphemism for Pakistan) didnt destroy it.
 

 
Then there was a star-studded panel, including Rory Stewart, an Afghani PR officer, an Afghani citizen, the head of the entire Canadian Army, the ambassador from Afghanistan, and the head of a Canadian government development agency. (I dont have the list in front of me, but I believe thats correct.) It was pretty impressive to see the head of the Canadian Army and he was a pretty impressive fellow, equally fluent in literature and philosophy as politics and warfare. But he steadfastly refused to take a position on whether the army should remain in Afghanistan, insisting that was a question for the population through their government. Stewart cleverly began the panel by saying that everyone in it had vested interests, including him, and that we should work hard to try to derive the truth from their statements.
 
At lunch we hear the most amazing presentation. Its a pitch for, I am not making this up Development-In-A-Box(TM)  a system that (again, I am not making this up), uses preconfigured solutions  embedded in business processes  automating compliance  [with] fully automated  wireframes. (And thats just the part I managed to record  the rest of it was far worse.) The presentation was complete with completely absurd PowerPoint clip art: a cargo crate flying to world hotspots, a hammer and sickle flying over a tank riding over an AK-47 pointed at a pile of Chinese-made goods, all above a 3D banner reading Less Clausewitz, More Sun-Tzu.
 
Adding to the sense of unreality, the speaker sounded like a broken animatronic Abe Lincoln, placing bizarre emphasis on random words and constantly speaking in a faux-upbeat tone.
 
The gist of the proposal was this: come up with a bunch of computer programs and simple rules that can be followed in any country, no matter how badly destroyed, to get its economy up and running so that investors can come in and start taking advantage of it. It was a reasonable idea, he explained, to get the economy started before a democratic government was because that was how history had usually proceeded  after all, the US only let everyone vote like fifty years ago.
 
I swear, I would have been convinced the talk was given by the Yes Men if it wasnt quite so bad. Even so, we were half-convinced it was some kind of prank. At least now I understand why businessmen kept falling for the Yes Mens pranks. (To be fair, there was a bunch of pushback. Not the least of which came from Rory Stewart, who pointed out that entering a wide variety of countries with pre-written rules might not be spectacularly effective.)
 
There was also a group photo in the mountains and some scheduled trips around town, but I neglected to bring a jacket so I mostly stayed inside the hotel, luxuriating in my oversized room and using my overpriced Internet connection. But soon enough it was time to catch the bus back to Calgary, and then to gritty, working-class San Francisco and the literal view from the ground, not the metaphorical one they need up in the mountains.
 

 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 16, 2008
 
Wow, I thought Id independently invented the moniker Texas of Canada for Alberta, I didnt realise it was a badge of honour for some residents. The conservatism you encountered there isnt universal, but it does abound, unfortunately.
 
posted by Ken
 on March 16, 2008 #
 
That pitch you describe about Development in a Box sounds like Thomas Barnett from Enterra solutions.
 
The guy is pretty smart strategically, FWIW - Ive been reading his blog at http://www.thomaspmbarnett.com/weblog/ for a few years now. You might find the talk at http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/view/id/33 show him in a better light, as long as youre willing to open your mind to a realist approach to world problems.
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on March 16, 2008 #
 
Another speech, probably better than the TED video one, this one recorded at Pop!Tech:
 
http://itc.conversationsnetwork.org/shows/detail238.html
 
This is the one that made me subscribe to his blog.
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on March 16, 2008 #
 
I suspect Development in a Box will merit a mention in the 2nd edition of The Shock Doctrine. You should read it if you havent already
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on March 16, 2008 #
 
Very interesting read Aaron.
 
A little thing: a result of the most disgusting discrimination and misogyny.  Is it not more like mathematics?  Or would you say the male slant in mathematics is caused by discrimination too?  I havent seen this discrimination but that doesnt mean it doesnt exist, I suppose.
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on March 17, 2008 #
 
The first meeting of my Macroeconomics class, the instructor talked
about the difference between simplifying assumptions and critical
assumptions. As an example, he said that the assumption that people
act rationally is a critical assumption in economics.
 
I spent the rest of the semester wondering why we were studying a
field based on a incorrect assumption which completely invalidated the
fields conclusions.
 
posted by Adam Gomaa
 on March 17, 2008 #
 
Rory Stewart also worked as deputy governor of an Iraqi province during the Iraq war. He wrote Prince of the Marshes describing this experience.
 
I googled but was unable to find what the event you are talking about was. What was it?
 
posted by Aarjav
 on March 17, 2008 #
 
If you want someone to do your companys work for you, finding a well-organized online community with strong anti-business values seems like a bad idea. [Laughs.]
 
It SEEMS that way. Which is why theres a whole cadre of clever men (and a few token women) who essentially sell consulting gigs on how to do exactly that, and what techniques of marketing and emotional manipulation work best towards that goal. The basic trick is running the business harnessing some sort of resentment. Like how right-wing talk-shows hosts who are corporate shills claim to be speakers for the downtrodden.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on March 19, 2008 #
 
The the head of the entire Canadian Army is more appropriately titled Chief of the Defence Staff General Rick Hillier. As you noted, hes an extremely smart man. Hes also very media-savvy and very charismatic. A little while ago there were rumors the government were going to replace him as he was getting far better press than his political masters, but those stories have subsided again for now.
 
posted by Paul Hart
 on March 24, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March  9, 2008
 
Title: Review: The New Ruthless Economy
 

 
During the boom years of the New Economy nineties, new technologies led to a boost in productivity and profits. But over the same period, compensation for actual workers stayed the same or even went down. In this book, Simon Head investigates the other side of technology: the way it keeps the average worker down.
 
Head finds that scientific management  the system that turned assembly lines into sweatshops in the 1880s  has expanded to conquer the service sector as well. Where old management consultants reorganized factories to deskill workers (by making them repeat mindless jobs over and over) and regulate behavior (by having overseers and stopwatches making sure they met their quotas), new management consultants reorganize call centers to deskill workers (by having them simply read scripts off a computer screen) and regulate behavior (by having their computers measure how long they spend on the phone and at lunch and in the bathroom).
 
But its not just call centers: Head finds the same technological reengineering of business in everything from factories to doctors offices, where HMO-enforced policies require doctors to do little more than type symptoms into a computer and prescribe the recommended treatment, with little time to investigate what might actually be wrong with the patient.
 
Heads argument is much like that of David Noble in Forces of Production: we had a choice about how to use new technology. We could use it to turn employees into ever-more-skilled craftspeople, allowing them to be more effective and creative in their jobs now that they had machines to do their dirty work. Or we could use it to turn employees into faster cogs for a machine, forcing them to follow rigidly-composed scripts carefully specifying their role.
 
We are once again choosing the second. Only this time it may hurt companies, not just employees. At least in manufacturing jobs, you can keep some kind of quality control tracking on the final product. A Toyota may not be very good, but if everyone follows the rules at least they will all be about the same. Service industry jobs require dealing with individual customers in all their messiness. And customers dont make good components in carefully reengineered machines.
 
The result is things like the infuriating 1-800 numbers were all familiar with: incompetent customer support, useless service, uninformed advice. Which means customers walk away. As management cuts costs by outsourcing their call centers  to less and less skilled employees, they also cut profits by alienating their customer base. (Head cites powerful studies by Frederick Reichheld finding that tiny increases in customer retention can lead to doublings in revenue.)
 
Head writes clearly and plainly, although the book lacks the concision of his brilliant pieces for the New York Review of Books (which this book grew out of). And while he does do some on-the-ground reporting, especially from car factories, the book has more of an eye for acronyms than for anecdotes. This is disappointing, because the techniques at the heart of the book (the automated systems for monitoring employees) would make for gripping reading, yet Head never gives us a glimpse of what they actually look like in practice.
 
For those with only a little time, the key chapter (6) is available online [PDF]. For those who want to dig deeper, I can recommend two related books from the same year: Christian Parentis The Soft Cage goes into more detail about surveillance technologies in all areas of life while his friend Doug Henwoods After the New Economy goes into more detail about the economic numbers behind such things.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March  9, 2008
 
Aaron,
that book is waiting to be written by you.
 
posted by 
 on March 10, 2008 #
 
You write: We could use it to turn employees into ever-more-skilled craftspeople, allowing them to be more effective and creative in their jobs now that they had machines to do their dirty work. Or we could use it to turn employees into faster cogs for a machine, forcing them to follow rigidly-composed scripts carefully specifying their role.
 
What nonsense. Its more bothand than eitheror. And there arent only two alternatives.
 
The new technologies dont JUST deskill us, they also reskill/overskill us among a myriad of other things.
 
Also its one of the first fields (music/art/play aside) that welcomes participation from kids without getting too pejorative about it. It also welcomes interaction with geezers and
 
Better luck next time.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on March 10, 2008 #
 
How about people skill themselves? Why is it the responsibility of employers to provide their unmotivated workforce with skills?
 
I think these new systems are being used because they work, not because it is an evil scheme to dumb down the workforce. Anybody who doesnt like it is free to pursue alternative careers, or found a business that uses a different technology.
 
posted by Bjrn
 on March 12, 2008 #
 
Scientific Management has been in and out of vogue since Taylors  The Principles of
Scientific Measurement (1910).  It was low hanging fruit to many industries and in some cases still is.  For instance this current article on farming in Africawhere planting crops in rows is a radical innovation!
 
That micromanagement isnt an improvement in some industries is a human issue and not a political one.  Everyone tinkers at the corners and successful people are imitated by others.  Toyota was a bad choice of example on your part because the Japanese adopted more flexible assembly line methods that invented by an American and eventually reimported.  As one of my friends puts it Americans make great Japanese cars.
 
Scientific Management has the most punishing effects at the national scale.  Socialism has been a failure on everything larger than a personal size (300 Amish villagers: works, 30mil French nationals: doesnt).
 
You may think this is just because the right ideas havent got top billing.  But how do you know which ideas are right?  and how can we elevate the right people to implement those ideas?
 
In dictatorships the people who are the most ruthless rise to the top - and not the people with the best ideas.  In democracies the people who campaign best rise to the top - and not the people with the best ideas.
 
You want the people to want the best ideas - which happen to match your own.  Now weve boiled it down to a people problem and as an engineer you should know that people problems are hard.    Not insurmountable, but harder than technical problems.  The last couple PyCons solved the hardest py3k issues at the bar than during sprints because the hardest issues were people issues.
 
posted by Jack Diederich
 on April 27, 2008 #
 
The whole tone of this seems to imply that once upon a time people had skillful jobs they loved, and that weve now lost this pastoral idyl. Are assembly line jobs worse than working on the field? And more, what proportion of people dont have to do either of these things anymore?
 
Im almost certain that (1) the very worst jobs arent as bad today as they were 100 (or 200) years ago, and (2) the median job is a lot better.
 
The result is things like the infuriating 1-800 numbers were all familiar with: incompetent customer support, useless service, uninformed advice. Which means customers walk away. 
 
I think more accurate would be to say that technology allowed companies to offer a lower level of service than had been possible before (e.g. pre-amazon, there had to be at least someone to take your money at the bookshop, and you could quiz them). So they tried this, and found it saved them money.
 
We all moan about poor airline service, but seldom enough not to fly with the airline. We reveal by doing so that the price were willing to pay for service isnt very high at all.
 
As management cuts costs by outsourcing their call centers to less and less skilled employees, they also cut profits by alienating their customer base. (Head cites powerful studies by Frederick Reichheld finding that tiny increases in customer retention can lead to doublings in revenue.)
 
This is a bit of a blanket statement. No doubt that in some industries service really pays. Thats why little fasion botiques have such attentive (and attractive) staff. But always and everywhere? The gas station off the interstate knows youre never coming back, and behaves accordingly.
 
posted by imporobable
 on May 15, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March  2, 2008
 
Title: The Visible Hand: A Summary
 
What follows is my summary of The Visible Hand by Alfred D. Chandler, Jr.
 
Its difficult today to imagine what American companies were like before the 1840s. They were small concerns, owned and operated by the same person in one location, and focusing on a particular type of product (cotton, provisions, wheat, dry goods, hardware, drugs) and one piece of the distribution chain (retailing, wholesaling, importing, exporting). Their corporate structure (the partnership), accounting techniques (double-entry bookkeeping), and financial instruments (letters of credit) were essentially unchanged from those used by the Italians in the 1390s.
 
Bigger projects were pursued through personal relationships between small firms: family farms had their slaves grow crops, which they sold to the local merchant, who shipped it to his son or nephew in London, who sold it to the local merchants there, and thence to the customers. (At the same time, credit headed the other direction.) As time went on, the number of intermediaries only increased: factors and jobbers and brokers and dealers and commission agents. Coordination was handled through the market.
 
(The one exception was the Bank of the United States, which had branches in many locations and thus could coordinate on something of a national scale. But it was politically unpopular and both the First and Second banks were allowed to expire by Congress.)
 
There was incredible inefficiency, but it mattered little since the technology of the time did not allow for great speed or volume. Canal boats were still pulled by animals, for whom four miles an hour was an impressive speed, and most products (clothing, furniture, clocks, nails) were produced by hand in peoples homes through the putting-out system. There were a handful of textile factories, but since they depended on water-power there was only room for a few of them.
 
All this changed with the railroads, a technological improvement which allowed business to move their products vastly faster. Careful coordination was essential (one didnt want trains crashing into each other), market entry expensive (constructing a railroad line cost a great deal of money), and network effects powerful (a railroad was much more valuable if it could move things all the way across the country).
 
As a result, the railroads built big enterprises, with professional managers to operate them. The businesses were the first to be structured along largely modern lines (the line-and-staff system): a board of directors appointed a professional manager as president, who oversaw a series of vice presidents supervising various company-wide topics (finance, traffic, legal) as well as a general manager. The general manager oversaw a number of divisions, each with departmental managers with profit and loss responsibility and a staff of their own. Each department sent statistics back to headquarters, allowing senior management to improve overall efficiency.
 
In addition to consolidating various different roles into a single organization, the railroads consolidated different organizations into a cartel with a few large players who coordinated pricing schemes and extracted the maximum each merchant was able to pay. The quintessential player in this era of empire-building was the speculator Jay Gould and his nemesis Cornelius Vanderbilt.
 
Gould got his start in 1868 when Vanderbilt attempted to seize control of the Erie railroad, the nearest competitor to his New York Central. Gould succeeded in stopping him and became the Eries largest stockholder and president. He then leased two additional lines and purchased shareholder proxies for two more lines, which he used to vote new directors into power, who then agreed to sell the lines to the Erie. (The courts and legislature quickly moved to stop him and the Pennsylvania seized control of the lines.) He merged with additional lines in Illinois, Ohio, and Michigan, before attempting to corner the market on gold, leading to a stock market crash. The crash forced other lines to sell, but Vanderbilt had more funds and bought them up.
 
Gould had more success in the telegraph industry, where consolidation came even more rapidly. Goulds railroads had contracts with Western Union allowing it to operate telegraph lines along the road. He canceled the contracts and signed agreements to partner with the lines attached to several other railroads. After he bought ocean lines to Latin America, Western Union was scared enough to purchase the competitor. (Gould sealed the deal by offering Vanderbilt, Western Unions largest stockholder, a controlling stake in one of his railroads if he persuaded the board to go through with the purchase.) After the sale, Gould started a new company with the telegraph lines of his remaining railroads, signed several additional deals, and announced plans to build a transatlantic cable. Western Union stock plummeted and Gould bought it up, becoming his competitors largest shareholder. He used this position to persuade Western Union to purchase his competitor at an inflated price and become the controlling member of Western Unions board, a position he used to fend off any future competitors.
 
Theodore Vail played a similar role at AT&T, while local utilities (power, light, heat) ended up being operated by regulated natural monopolies. Soon the nations infrastructure was entirely owned by either public (e.g. the post office) or private (AT&T) monopolies. In each case, it was operated by professional managers who planned and controlled the entire system.
 
The new national infrastructure (railroads, telegraph, steamships, post office) allowed for new national distributors (wholesalers, department stores, mail-order houses, chains) which were themselves organized and managed in the same ways. Department stores, for example, had a manager in charge of each department, with only things like janitors and delivery people shared across the entire store.
 
Such big stores moved to also take the place of wholesalers by building their own distribution networks and, in time, take control of manufacturing as well. Large mail-order houses like Sears Roebuck began building systems of conveyer belts and pneumatic tubes for ensuring orders got assembled promptly  along with systems for punishing those who held the line up. And the geographically-distributed chain stores organized themselves under regional managers who kept tabs on local performance with a team of inspectors.
 
Geographic centralization, automation, and employee monitoring allowed such national concerns to move goods faster, which made them more efficient than the numerous local stores they put out of business. It was economies of speed, not of scale.
 
A similar speeding-up happened in production. The opening of the coal mines provided cheap power for new factories with mass-production machines while railroads provided a market their output. The factories were set up as simple assembly lines operating continuous-process machines, like those built to cut wheat, solder cans, and roll cigarettes. Henry Ford extended this system into assembly with his moving assembly line in which continuous conveyor belts moved parts past the workers. In each factory, managers personally oversaw the line foremen who oversaw each part of the process. By the 1880 census, 80% of manufacturing employees worked in factories, with the putting-out system remaining only for clothing.
 
Fredrick W. Taylor encouraged factories to speed up even further by following his system of scientific management. He proposed a companys lines be run by a planning department which would conduct careful time-and-motions studies to discover the optimal way to carry out each part of the process. Line-level managers would then be responsible for ensuring that individual employees kept producing at the optimal rate. Few followed Taylors recommendations exactly, especially his suggestion to place the planning department in charge of the lines, but many companies adopted his ideas to accelerate their factories.
 
The new speeds, in turn, produced so many products that the national stores couldnt sell them all, leading the manufacturers into distribution and marketing of their own. They began building a regional sales staff, doing national ad campaigns, and buying up competitors. The result was national brands like American Tobacco, Diamond Match, Quaker Oats, Pillsbury Flour, Campbell Soup, Heinz, Borden, Carnation, Libby, Procter & Gamble, and Kodak  most of which remain leaders today.
 
Why did these few leaders achieve such domination? It was not thru their superior technology  they leased the machines they use for assembly. Nor was it their marketing acumen  they all hired professional marketers for the job. And it could not be the power of their brands, for they all invented these brands from scratch. Instead, it was their superior organization that provided the main barrier to entry. Anyone who wanted to compete would have to build their own national network of managers, buyers, and salesmen.
 
And even this was made more difficult for competitors. The first-mover was able to start small, use profits to fund growth, and use the resulting economies of scale to lower prices while expanding nationally. But any competitor would have to start out by competing against this national, low-price network. They would either have much higher per-item costs since they were producing so much less or they would have to borrow enormous amounts of capital to build a high-volume network from the beginning. And who would want to fund such a risky endeavor? Newcomers did appear (Kellogg, Postum, Colgate, Babbitt) but they were rare and the industries remain oligopolies.
 
Industrial products (lumber, petroleum, metal, etc.) also began forming national oligopolies. It started with industry-wide trade associates, which quickly became cartels that conspired to fix prices. However, the incentive to cheat on the cartels by secretly lowering prices was too great and, since cartels were illegal, there was no legal way to prevent it. So companies moved to form trusts, in which one firm would hold in trust the shares of the other firms in exchange for shares of itself. When the Sherman Antitrust Act outlawed trusts, New Jersey stepped in to allow the creation of holding companies  easy-to-establish corporations which simply held the stock of other corporations. But in the early 1900s the courts ruled that even this form violated the law and the companies moved to merge outright, forming a single corporation.
 
But such horizontal integration was rarely very profitable. The real success always came from vertical integration: taking control of suppliers and distribution.
 
Managers who oversaw the factories carefully measured their efficiency. They wanted to maximize the use of the expensive equipment they had purchased, so the repeatedly pushed to speed up the lines and use them more efficiency. This increased efficiency resulted in increased production which resulted in corporate growth which naturally required more lines.
 
At the same time corporations continued this within-industry expansion, higher-level managers saw the generic processes at work and pushed for between-industry expansion: reusing the same management structures and same tools to grow the company and brand into new businesses.
 
And thus, managerial capitalism  the corporate form in which professional managers ran large, national corporation whose owners had at most veto power over their efforts  spread across the country. Their administrative coordination allowed for greater productivity and lower costs, but required a managerial hierarchy which could carry out more functions. The managers also allowed them to increase volume, but also allowed the managers to ensure a permanent place for themselves. The task of management became more technical and specialized and management became separated from ownership. As a result, managers were able to direct the company in ways that favored stability over profits, and the resulting huge enterprises changed the shape of the economy.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March  2, 2008
 
Thanks for the post,
 
I thinks that the technological  progress is the predominant factor of the economy evolution.
 
posted by Smel
 on March  3, 2008 #
 
A good book to follow up with is Neil Fligsteins The Transformation of Corporate Control. William Roys Socializing Capital is also good, though not a very friendly read.
 
posted by Kieran
 on April 10, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February 22, 2008
 
Title: Very Good Introductions
 
Oxford University Press has a wonderful series they call Very Short Introductions. The books are small, short, colorful paperbacks with titles like The Brain, Political Philosophy or The Tudors. For each one, the editors find an expert in the field, have them write a brief overview of all the relevant areas of study (thus the book on Globalization covers economics, politics, culture, environment, ideology, and the opposition movement) and edits them to be clear and concise.
 
The result is a very good series of books, and Ive enjoyed them immensely, but its not quite what I want. For one thing, the shortness of the books (theyre usually about a hundred half-size pages) makes them unfulfilling. Its impossible to get a real understanding of a big topic in fifty pages, especially when many of them are taken up summarizing related concerns. (Perhaps you could provide a nice overview of economic globalization in fifty pages, but covering economic, political, cultural, environmental, and ideological globalization in that space is absurd.)
 
And the other is that, however great the editors at OUP, it seems impossible that they would be able to commission the best exposition of every topic for one series. Many of the greatest writers are not going to accept a particular commission, do not approve of some piece of the series style, or perhaps want credit or attention for themselves rather than being just another book in a huge OUP series.
 
So thats why Id like us to put together our own series  not of very short introductions, but of very good ones. These are books which a) try to explain a whole subject with b) clarity and even joy while making c) no strong assumptions of prior knowledge and d) not dumbing the subject down. Its an extremely rare combination  there are many books on subjects that are good but unreadable by the average person, while theres a whole industry churning out pop sci pageturners that communicate little actual knowledge of a subject. But the rare book that actually achieves all four of these goals is a true gem, and ought to be promoted more widely.
 
Please post your suggestions in the comments and Ill try to assemble a list of them next week. Ill go first:
 
Law 101: Everything You Need to Know about the American Legal System by Jay M. Feinman
 
This delightful book goes over the key points of constitutional law, civil procedure, torts, contracts, property, criminal law, etc. with wit, style, and lots of great examples. Sit down not knowing anything about the subject and come away with a clear enough understanding of torts, contracts, and crimes to apply the ideas in your daily life.
 
OK, your turn.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 22, 2008
 
Two of the best of the VSI series Ive read:
Consciousness, Susan Blackmore
Literary Theory, Jonathan Freeland
 
posted by tom s.
 on February 22, 2008 #
 
Somebody already did:
 
http://ask.metafilter.com/71101/What-single-book-is-the-best-introduction-to-your-field-or-specialization-within-your-field-for-laypeople
 
posted by David McCabe
 on February 22, 2008 #
 
Machine Learning, Tom M. Mitchell, McGraw-Hill International Editions for the field of machine learning.
 
Probabilistic Robotics, Sebastian Thrun and Wolfram Burgard and Dieter Fox, The MIT Press.
 
posted by Carsten van Weelden
 on February 22, 2008 #
 
Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach by Norvig and Russell
 
Programming Collective Intelligence by Segaran
 
something (Character of Physical Law?) by Feynman
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on February 22, 2008 #
 
History of hip hop culture and music - Cant Stop, Wont Stop - Jeff Chang
 
The blues tradition in America - The Land Where The Blues Began - Alan Lomax
 
posted by maetl
 on February 22, 2008 #
 
The Selfish Gene - by Richard Dawkins. Short and excellent description of evolution
 
posted by Mahesh Kamat
 on February 22, 2008 #
 
A few that come to mind:
 
Will Kymlicka, Contemporary Political Philosophy: An Introduction, 2nd ed., Oxford, 2001
 
D. T. Suzuki, An Introduction to Zen Buddhism, New York, 1964
 
C. S. Nino, Introduccin al anlisis del derecho, Buenos Aires, 1980. [By far the most lucid, intelligent and comprehensive introduction to legal theory I know of, still awaiting translation.]
 
Alexander Miller, An Introducion to Contemporary Metaethics, Cambridge, 2003
 
Robert Winkler, An Introduction to Bayesian Inference and Decision, 2nd ed., Gainsville, 2003
 
David Chalmers, The Conscious Mind, Oxford, 1996
 
Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, London, 1912
 
posted by Pablo Stafforini
 on February 23, 2008 #
 
This is cheating, because I begged him to write it, but the best (and afaik) only book about etymology for non-linguists is Word Origins and How We Know Them by Anatoly Liberman. (Also OUP)
 
posted by Erin
 on February 23, 2008 #
 
Norman Davies, Europe: a History,
Harper Perennial, 1998.
 
posted by Will Britton
 on February 23, 2008 #
 
for civil engineering:
 
J E Gordon, Structures
 
Explains how structures carry a load, examples are usually taken from nature. There are helpful illustrations. Some basic equations and tables are included.
 
-this is one of my favorite books, I am about to read it for the second time.
 
posted by R. Mutt
 on February 23, 2008 #
 
That Russell and Norvig book is what got me started studying AI (my brother lent it to me). Its actually referred to at my faculty as the AI Bible.
 
Although I personally dont love it, it is extremely comprehensive, showcasing almost all facets covered in the AI bachelor at University of Amsterdam.
 
posted by Carsten van Weelden
 on February 23, 2008 #
 
posted by Hay
 on February 23, 2008 #
 
The Story of Philosophy - Will Durant
 
That being said a recommendation that Bryan Magee makes and Ill pass along with philosophy there are between 12 and 22 or so great philosophers and I think youre much better served reading one of their books than reading any commentary on their works.  Many of them are notoriously misunderstood because a secondary text becomes the orthodox reading and then this incorrect interpretation becomes the more powerful meme.  I also find that a lot of introductions to particular philosophers actually make it more difficult instead of less so.  Only when you cant grasp the work of philosopher directly is it really helpful to go to a secondary source and then only in order to get you back to the primary source as soon as you can.
 
So not every realm of inquiry is going to lend itself well to abbreviation.
 
I pretty much avoid intros now except when its a large subject and I dont plan to get very deep in it later.  If I do plan on going deep I just jump right in.
 
posted by Mike
 on February 24, 2008 #
 
The stock market / how to invest
 
As an introduction, and enough to get you investing:
A Random Walk Down Wall Street by Burton Malkiel
 
A comprehensive overview which will give you a complete understanding:
Stocks for the Long Run by Jeremy Siegel
 
posted by Joseph Perla
 on February 25, 2008 #
 
Bucky Fullers Critical Path
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on February 25, 2008 #
 
Designing graphics for data:
 
The Visual Display of Quantitative Information (Tufte)
 
A quick, clean read, and one of the more beautiful books youll find.
 
Typography: Thinking with Type (Ellen Lupton)
 
posted by Phil Crosby
 on February 25, 2008 #
 
                                                                                                      
 
posted by 12
 on February 25, 2008 #
 
Aaron, you think AIMA is understandable for the average person?
 
Perhaps you need to explain what you mean by average.
 
posted by anonymous
 on March  2, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February  4, 2008
 
Title: Election Slate: February 2008
 
Being a newly-minted California voter, Ive been looking forward to my opportunity to exercise a little direct democracy tomorrow. (Im not taking a position on whether direct democracy is a good idea, but surely if its there one might as well take advantage of it.) I encourage you to vote as well; indeed, I encourage you to vote the same way I do:
 
Presidential Candidate for the Democratic Party: Barack Obama. Between Mike Gravels inability to get more attention than a passing mention from Wikipedia and everybody else dropping out, the choice is apparently down to Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton. Hillary is the kind of sellout DLC centrist who cozies up to Rupert Murdoch; Barack Obama can hardly be worse. Still, hes sold out too and I vote for him under the illusion that hell somehow revert to his community organizing, Iraq War-opposing, progressive old pre-sellout self sometime before becoming President. False hope springs eternal.
 
Proposition 91: No. So bad, even its supporters are asking you to vote against it.
 
Proposition 92: Yes. Community college is important and previous propositions have been screwing it over for years.
 
Proposition 93: Yes. Progressives seem to oppose term limits, on the grounds that they shift[] more power to the governor and ensur[e] that the State Assembly and the State Senate will be filled with people who lack the experience and institutional history to fight the Sacramento lobbyists (who, of course, have no term limits) (SFBG). Im not so sure, but this seems like a fairly modest proposal which seems to strike a reasonable balance.
 
Propositions 94-97: No. The only people in favor of expanding the casinos while reducing their oversight seem to be their lobbyists.
 
Proposition A: Yes. Parks are nice.
 
Proposition B: Yes. Everyone seems to support this and if police officers want to work three more years, who am I to say no?
 
Proposition C: Yes. I know rationally this is an absurd proposal, but when youre there, in the privacy of the voting booth, looking at whether a geodesic dome should be built on Alcatraz Island, whos going to stop you from voting yes?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February  4, 2008
 
Dem. Pres.: Obama.  I sure hope he makes it.
 
92: No.  Community colleges are awesome, and need funding, but the way to do this is not by initiative.  All the stupid initiative funding mandates tie the hands of the legislature, and make CAs budget an insolvent inflexible mess. (Id make a longer argument about this, but it would take a few pages)
 
93: Yes.  Good god, the current term limits are stupid.  Too bad that abolishing them altogether wouldnt get the votes.
 
The rest: No.  Theyre all terrible.
 
ABC: Im not from SF, so no comment.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on February  4, 2008 #
 
First off, proposition 91 isnt bad.  Its just been passed already in 2006.  Saying its so bad, even its supporters are asking you to vote against it is a complete mischaracterization.  Theres just no point in voting for prop 91 anymore.
 
Regarding Proposition 93, Im not so sure that its is good.  First off, it grants significant extensions to currently serving members of the state assembly and senate.  Second of all, we already have a way of kicking out representatives: its called voting them out.  Why should we punish good legislators by forcing them to leave their jobs for someone wholl be worse?  If we want certain representatives out, vote them out!  Its as simple as that.
 
As for the Obama suggestion, wow do your opinions of him completely mirror mine.  I am also considering reluctantly voting for him.
 
posted by Simone Manganelli
 on February  4, 2008 #
 
Elections are an oligarchic scam.
 
posted by Sortition
 on February  5, 2008 #
 
Simone: re: 93.  We shouldnt force legislators out without a vote.  Thats why we should lengthen term limits, even if we cant abolish them altogether (they were established by another proposition a few years ago).
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on February  6, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 28, 2008
 
Title: A Very Speculative Theory of Free Will
 
Title:  How dumb is Swartz?
 
Previously: How Quantum Mechanics is Compatible with Free Will
 
Attention conservation notice: I am well aware that this post will get me called all sorts of silly names and insults (Penrosian apparently the worst among them). For once, I am not going to respond. I just think the theory ought to be published and if you are not inclined to believe it, then feel free to ignore it.
 
The big mystery of the mind is reconciling two things: what we know about the physical structures of the brain and what we experience from day to day as conscious people. The first tells us that our brain is made up of a series of interconnected neurons which fire in response to certain inputs. The second tells us that people have subjective unified experiences and at least the appearance of free will. It seems hard to explain how the first can lead to the second, although theyre obviously connected somehow.
 
So, for example, if were looking at certain visual illusions, we can choose to see them one way or to see them another way. And obviously this choice has some impact on the rest of the brain, especially the part that processes vision. But nobodys been able to find the place in the brain from which such choices originate.
 
I dont know enough about the subject to vouch for it, but this article claims that neurons are small enough that we could see quantum effects in their high-level behavior:
 
The juncture between two neurons is called the synapse.  Each of the perhaps 100 billion neurons in the brain is connected to about 1,000 other neurons.  At the synapse, a firing neuron either passes a neurochemical signal to the next neuron, or it does not pass a signal, with the passing or not passing depending on the complex neurochemistry of the synapse.  If, within a millisecond, a certain number of signals are passed on to a neuron, then that neuron will fire.  Otherwise it will not fire.  Thus what happens at the various synapsessignal passed on or not passed onis the sole determinant of the firing pattern of the neurons in the brain.  The synapses are the control points for our flow of thoughts.
 
The synaptic gap, the gap between one neuron and the next, is quite small, 3.5 nanometers, which is about 35 (hydrogen) atoms.  The sizes of the adjacent parts of the synapse, where much of the neurochemistry goes on, are also small, on the order of 3,500 atoms wide.  Now one of the peculiar effects of quantum mechanics is that if the volume where an atom might be located (the place where the wave function is non-zero) is initially small, it will spread out in time.  One can use Heisenbergs uncertainty principle to show that a calcium ion, for example, will spread out to the size of the synapses (not just the synaptic gap) in about .1 milliseconds (see 8 below).  Neural processes in the brain occur on a time scale of a millisecond, ten times slower than the spread of a calcium ion over the whole synapse.
 
So heres the proposal: a series of entangled quantum particles at the synaptic level allow for coordinated firing patterns which occur in response to choices by our conscious free will. Just as my previous post reconciled free will with statistical randomness, this would seem to reconcile free will with the neuroanatomy.
 
It still seems incredible that there is some high-level coordinated process with its fingers in the quantum effects of our synapses. But we know something incredible is going on because we have subjective experience. So this doesnt seem like much of a stretch to me.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 28, 2008
 
So you are saying our brain has a mechanism to choose which quantum state its in? Thats hard to believe. How could evolution (which acts on a non-quantum level) get a grasp on this process of  jumping between parallel universes?
 
IMO there is no paradox of Free Will versus the mechanics of the brain. There is no Free Will. Its an illusion.
 
posted by felix
 on January 28, 2008 #
 
How could evolution discover consciousness? Same mystery.
 
The parallel universes interpretation makes it easy: our consciousness only persists in the universe where the properties of the entanglement make sense. I dont believe PU for a moment, though. (Im a Bohmian myself.)
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 28, 2008 #
 
I dont know what unified experiences means, and so Im not sure I have them.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on January 28, 2008 #
 
Im not sure why you would object to being called Penrosian. From what I remember of The Emperors New Mind, your proposal here is exactly what he proposed 19 years ago. (Of course, I read it 18 years ago, so my memory may be flawed :)
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on January 28, 2008 #
 
How could evolution discover consciousness?
 
It didnt. Consciousness is an illusion. As is the passage of time, but thats a separate argument :)
 
posted by felix
 on January 28, 2008 #
 
For once Im on Aarons side:
 
For those of you call consciousness an illusion: An illusion is usually thought of as a misperception of reality by some observer.  In other words, reality is in state X, while the observer believes that it is in state Y.
 
If consciousness is an illusion, who or where is the observer that is being fooled?  If Im fooled into thinking that Im conscious, doesnt that make me de facto conscious?
 
posted by Mark
 on January 28, 2008 #
 
 a series of entangled quantum particles at the synaptic level 
 
Sorry. I stopped taking the argument seriously at that point. Thats right up there with dilithium crystals depolarizing the transporter confinement beam causing a warp core breach. Red Alert!
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on January 28, 2008 #
 
On the quantum thing.
 
There is no need to treat ions and nuclei quantum mechanically in any other model of macroscopic liquid collisions or electrochemistry. Classical theories of electrical conductivity (Debye Huckel theory for example) do perfectly well.
 
In a liquid each ion is surrounded by solvent molecules - the effective container size is much smaller, and therefore the timescales much shorter. But quantum treatment of nuclear motion is not needed at all.
 
In fact, in any chemical process where the atoms involved are bigger than hydrogen, quantum effects on nuclear motions are absolutely negligible. You do need to consider them to get realistic treatments of hydrogen bonding (a H atom bounces back and forth between two O atoms) but nothing bigger than that unless you are looking at very high resolution experiments.
 
The uncertainty principle calculation is a red herring. 1ms is a very very long time, and the Calcium ion will undergo many many collisions in that time, so any spreading of the wavepacket (implicitly, of an isolated ion) is swamped by the effect of collisions. Its just not significant.
 
posted by tom s.
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
Quantum mechanics is the new souls.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
posted by haig Shahinian
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
Go read On Intelligence and realise youre wrong.
 
posted by El Diablo Communista
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
I love On Intelligence but it has zero relevance.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
I dont know why some people can agree with applying occams razor to almost all other phenomenon we encounter, but then when it comes to their own consciousness they suddenly decide to agree with elaborate theories of quantum entangled microtubules within our brain when its clearly the least probable theory.  The brain is EXTREMELY complex as it is, with MASSIVE feedback throughout, and doesnt require a leap to the QM hypothesis unless you need it for your own speculative reasons.
 
I once tried entertaining this quantum consciousness hypothesis with enthusiasm because if our consciousness is somehow caused by QM effects as Penrose suggests, then that opens up a window of possibility for elevating our souls once again above just an evolved material machine and into the spooky realm of of the quantum.  I dont think that way anymore but we dont have a complete understanding of how brain creates mind yet, and so it still is a possibility, but a very very unlikely one.  Why dont you believe in intelligent design?  Its as likely as the QM consciousness hypothesis.
 
Consciousness, though I would hasten to call it an illusion, is what Minsky calls a suitcase word.  A word which doesnt have any specific definition and has come to represent one thing when in reality it is just an emergent epiphenomenon resulting from many different processes occurring at the same time.
 
What exactly does quantum entanglement add to the brain that could not otherwise be explained without it?
 
posted by haig Shahinian
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
Discussing free will without discussing identify (ie what is free) is like studying fish without any knowledge of water.
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
This idea in no way gets around the mind-body problem which has beset all dualist theories since Descartes i.e. how can there be any kind of causal contact between the mind (which must be non-physical to have free-will) and the brain (in your case entangled quantum particles at the synaptic level in Descartes the Pineal Gland)?
 
Penrose to his credit at least admitted that quantum theory was no use as random laws were just as useless as deterministic laws for free-will. What he argued therefore was that some as yet to be discovered property of quantum gravity would allow room for freewill. Francis Crick summarised this argument as follows quantum gravity is mysterious, consciousness is mysterious so one might explain the other Not very convincing is it?
 
But I think anyone who has read anything about this isssue would know most of this. Just for a change how about challenging the other side of the coin i.e. the assumption that we all experience free-will so that there is something that must be explained. Is that really your experience of everyday life? Presumably you work out, save money, have enriching hobbies, are always in a good mood with loved ones, have no bad habits etc etc? If not, why not?
 
Some people seem to think being an evolved, physical creature is a terrible fate but really most of the good things of life only make sense from this perspective. I love my little monkeys because I am a big monkey - its not rational or chosen. A free-will possessed, rational superbeing would be some kind of angel or monster.
 
posted by flex
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
And now I have started on the evryday experience of having freewill just use a little bit of introspection. An example I like to use is having a conversation. It is certainly not my experience that a little internal dialogue box pops up with options and I choose what to say, a freeflowing conversation happens too quick. I dont know what I am going to say. In emergencies people often describe themselves as being surprised by what they did. We do not even have very good access to what our brain is doing never mind choose options. What we do have is language to report our internal states but this is at best partial.
 
posted by flex
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
Consciousness is an illusion? How is that possible, since illusion presupposes consciousness?
 
Thats a good point. Sounds a bit like: I think therefore I am. It depends on your definition of consciousness (and illusion).
 
What I meant to say is that consciousness has no physical reality. Our consciousness cannot affect physical reality.  It is merely a by-product of physical processes.
 
I wont deny that there is a phenomena of consciousness that we perceive. I just think it exists in some state other than physical reality. I imagine consciousness like an image on a TV screen. Physical Reality (the brain) is the phosphor and electronics of the TV. The image is generated by patterns in the TVs physical state so it does exist in some way, but the image could never decide to be a different image and rearrange the TV atoms. Its a one-way street.
 
posted by felix
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
Why do you care about this so much?
 
Ive seen so many very smart people pour so much energy and effort into arguing ad infinitum about the source of consciousness which, as far I can tell, nobody has any theories about how some might prove or disprove. I dont know, and thats fine, because I cant see how either way would change any of my actions in the ways that have real effects on others.
 
posted by Benjamin Mako Hill
 on January 30, 2008 #
 
I tend to agree with what others have said about deploying Occam. You suggest our free will modifies firing patterns through a quantum-level mechanism. If our free will is a characteristic of brain activity, surely its more likely to influence directly, at an electro-chemical level?
 
Im not sure the question of free will is a useful one anyhow, Occam again: is the existence of free will necessary for our perception of the thing we call free will? I doubt it, but that leads back into other questions of perception and consciousness.
 
I suspect there is a lot more can be usefully learned about consciousness, as some kind of emergent property at the interface between one complex system (the brain) and another (everything else).
 
I think I can summarise these points with the question: would a brain in a jar have free will?
 
posted by Danny
 on January 30, 2008 #
 
PS. Try substituting the word magic wherever you see the word quantum. Does that break anything?
 
posted by Danny
 on January 30, 2008 #
 
Random quantum effects isnt free will. Its random. Im not sure how our neuro-chemistry can have an effect on exotic quantum effects. Perhaps some interpretation of collapsing the wave function through thinking chooses between alternate choices?
 
Good argument here:
 
http://www.quitefresh.com/2007/10/free-will-is-against-laws-of-physics.html
 
posted by RXP
 on January 30, 2008 #
 
Youve got the right idea, that its a matter of crazy huge and small scales, but youve got the wrong variables. Entangled quantum states is not a necessary construct. Way too small. Random thermal vibration of molecules, however, is a larger scale effect that can be modeled as a quantum effect (assuming our boy Gibbs has anything to do with it). I suppose youd really need to understand how quantum mechanics gives rise to the statistical mechanical model we call thermal physics.
 
Once you understand that, you need 
1) evolutionary time
2) mesoscale time
3) size of the brain
4) number of synapses in a brain (trillions)
5) number of neurons in a brain (billions)
6) various derivative things, like synapses per neuron, specialization of sets, local and disseminated sets, etc. 
7) fraction of brain not consumed with reptilian tasks
8) Number of and types of machines in neurons: R ribosomes, P protein systems, S second-messenger systems (and S and S and S, etc), nuclear signaling systems, SNRPs, etc. (probably measuring in the thousands).
 
So youve got thousands to millions of transistor-level machines inside each of billions of cells interacting in trillions-raised-to-the-trillions of combinations. Plus lots of specialization in diffuse and local patterns. Floating in a electrodynamic soup. You dont need entangled quantum states. The state of that system is thoroughly complex enough at the molecular/chemical/thermal-physics/statistical-mechanics level.
 
Some of these neurons are just wet half-adders. Some are these sensual, diffuse distributed things that monitor crazy stuff, like system temperature.
 
I think Jeff Hawkins has the right idea. The reptilian brain is sort of a motherboard type of thing and the cortex is a sort of large storage system, which can also be used for virtualization of various additional machines. I think these virtual machines would be the classical brain areas, like Wernickes area, Brocas area, that sort of thing.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on January 30, 2008 #
 
You know, on the virtual machine thing  Im sure youve seen the old grids of magnetic balls suspending at the nodes of a wire grid, the first addressable storage? All those cortical neurons are members of similar, highly defined, highly systematic, structures. They dont have names, as I recall, but you could think of them sort of like disk sectors. But theyre arranged in columns. If you unwrap the wrinkled cortex and lay it out like a sheet, and inject a single cortical neuron with some dye, youll see it that dye diffuse to involve a small column (and I think its actually a hollow column, a tube, if you well) of neurons near by. One can imagine the white matter axons underlying these columns could be going to columns and the signal on the axon is designed to query that column and the column has developed through experience in such a way to respond to the stimulus by retransmitting another pattern, perhaps back the way it came, perhaps down another axon, or series of axons. And once a certain series of patterns is replicated and reinforced enough, a stimulus goes to some other extra-cortical area, like the limbic system where you might feel some fear or longing, or from the motor cortex do the basal ganglia and out to the extra-pyramidal systems (extra-pyramidal = (but not ==) extra-cortical: cortical neurons are generally pyramidal in shape).
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on January 30, 2008 #
 
Mako++ :)
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on January 31, 2008 #
 
((my english is not good enough for this - please excuse.))
 
it does not seem too amazing that the idea of free will can be reconciled with neuroanatomy - especially by investigating the process: starting after the intention behind, no matter from which perspective, quantum or magic. ;-) Neither one - free or determined thought -  would be contradictionary to the neuronal transmission, I promise ;-)
 
and the other way round: nothing we will explore on a material level will object free will.
insofar quantums are the best focus.;-)
a huge amount of liberty is still far away from freedom.
 
Randomness possibly seen as maximum of freedom may at any level be the result of/our word for explaining/observing without knowing enough, which again is very probable.
Personally i dislike the word random, as it seems more like our observation of the most effective evolvement system to me: maximum freedom, but within a system : no goal + evolvement energy + the system or ist initiation.
No goal is as close as possible to free will: we can choose (the goal) within the system. 
And now again, maximum evolvement would actually be what i would invent if i was almighty and bored/courious ;-)
(we are certainly not (yet) the observers of the whole illusion - but that is no argument against illusion.)
personally i would not call it an illusion  i would call it a possible, relational and restricted experience 
(@being lucky: this is truly a question in strong relation to ones thoughts, which are related to chemical processes too: while thoughts can go down in a spiral to depression or be depressive by birth reasons they can be enabled to be cured chemically, because of the material relation  how great.
So in general: you will always and everywhere find the relation between biology, chemistry, physics  material. Thats the relation, the restriction-and though possible freedom of our consciousness ;-)
consciousness as result of evolution (again i prefer evolvement) is still a creative power - so it seems likely that there is a creative power behind evolution - as it is ongoing creation (random or determined)  but it simply does not necessarily assume a TARGETED creator.
so THIS seems to be the question and the answer to my little brain: if there is/would be a goal - it is/would be determinism, if not - it is, restricted by birth,challenge/reaction/power,time and death: something like free will :-)
(not too free, uh? :-)) 
(nothing seems to be targeted, actually, except evolvement to higher level itself as purpose: which again, to be most effective, demands the illusion of free will for creative consciousness, which again allows to avoid too - so this IS free will (including insecure outcome) then. (not too free again, as any choice has consequences  and most humans are aware of this  without knowing the outcome for sure, they do know an individually different amount of unified relations possibilities restricted by fear of anything  but free will)
so i do personally replace free will with free choice and will based on values
if there is a creative power behind evolution we simply cant answer the question of free will, because it is the wrong question, admittedly an important one though - it is a question of what dimension we discuss.
which, in the end means that there is no free will, as free will would mean: at any dimension and free of restrictions.
but it is quite reconciling that there is free will within the finite-dimensional experience of time: the subjective one.
 
posted by sleepy aber in schreiblaune
 on January 31, 2008 #
 
If a pseudo random number generator is not compatible with your definition of free will I do not understand how a (real) random number generator can make it any better. How does the free come into play if our mind draws its inputs for decisions from a stream of random numbers?
 
posted by Conny
 on January 31, 2008 #
 
You should read Johnjoe McFaddens Quantum Evolution.
 
http://www.surrey.ac.uk/qe/
 
posted by flippy
 on January 31, 2008 #
 
So heres the proposal: a series of entangled quantum particles at the synaptic level allow for coordinated firing patterns which occur in response to choices by our conscious free will
 
What exactly has this to do with free will? You conveniently forgot to mention were free will comes from in the first place.
 
So here is my proposal: a series of entangled Micky Mice at the synaptic level allow for coordinated firing patterns that occur in response to choices by our conscious free will.
 
P.S. Sorry, I could not resist. It is not to be taken personally. But you should hold you own theories against the same standards you do with others.
 
posted by Conny
 on February  1, 2008 #
 
If you assume that you are defined, then it seems to me that, according to Hawkings forthcomming artilce, your choices could actually determine  their causes.
 
http://www.bioedonline.org/news/news.cfm?art=2617
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on February  4, 2008 #
 
This one tortured me from the age of 15 or so (whenever I saw a Horizon documentary on AI, Searle etc) to midway through university, when I gave up on the dream. This was a huge shakeup for my worldview, and was greatly influenced by hearing Susan Blackmore talk to the philosophy dept here (1992/3 i guess). She had spent years passionately chasing evidence for the paranormal, before regretfully - and bravely - coming to the conclusion that it just wasnt there. Until I heard her speak I was chasing the same trails, and looking for a story about consciousness via quantum wierdness was (for me) a part of that. Yeah Id call them Penrosian ideas btw.
 
Subsequently Ive come to terms with being composed of inanimate matter, and with my thinking, feeling and remembering (avoiding nouns here helps; Dennett got that from Ryle fwiw) being grounded in fairly ordinary chemistry. I used to find that picture of the world somehow horrible and cold; now I find it strangely beautiful. Rather than being made of mere matter, I get to think how amazing it is that the only difference between me and my raw ingredients is the way Im arranged. Its left me with an almost pantheistic outlook
 
posted by Dan Brickley
 on April  1, 2008 #
 
I do not understand the problem. And this solution with quantum mechanics certainly does not solve anything.
 
Lets just assume something: One really smart mind finds out the answer to the question whether there is free will. Now he tells people Hey, the solution is, there is no free will, its all deterministic.
What would happen? Nothing. Nothing would change - the world would run as it was.
So lets assume something else: He finds out that we do have free will. Wow, everyone likes to hear that somehow, but what would actually change? Nothing. Again no one would do anything different just because he knows he has free will.
Ok - so for me the conclusion is: There is no difference. Its both the same - free will or not free will, the problem does not exist.
 
Oh yeah - there is this third option - the guy finds out well, its all quantum stuff. Well first of all - I dont get why anyone would conclude that this reconciles free will. By definition it means everything is random. No will at all and no determination. (and Ive read your other article about it, I think there you pretty much agree at the end).
Now what does that solve? Nothing at all.
 
I think the question you ask is the wrong one. We do have to first find the correct question - then we can try to find the right answer.
 
posted by Thomas Schmall
 on October  7, 2009 #
 
Lets just assume something: One really smart mind finds out the answer to the question whether there is free will. Now he tells people Hey, the solution is, there is no free will, its all deterministic. What would happen? Nothing.
 
I dont think thats quite fair. Imagine someone discovers one day that the Eiffel Tower isnt connected to the ground. In one sense, this wouldnt change much  people would still go up in the Eiffel Tower, it would still look nice in photographs, etc. But it would be very fascinating to learn how it managed to stay in one place without being connected to the ground and also why everyone thought it was connected to the ground for so many years.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 11, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 19, 2008
 
Title: How Dumb is Daniel Dennett?
 
It continually amazes me how many otherwise-intelligent people I know claim to be fans of Daniel Dennett, a bitter hack philosopher who spends his days sucking up to scientists and writing personal attacks on other philosophers. As Daniel Davies put it, I used to be a rabid Dennettite [until] I started reading more widely in the subject, and found that Dennett had been pretty (no, make that very) badly behaved [] And thats when the hate developed.
 
At some point it feels unfair to keep picking on the guy, but I came across a gem that, even after looking at it for months, still manages to amaze me. Here, in full, is Daniel Dennetts argument determinism is compatible with free will.
 
(For context, this comes after pages discussing Conways game of life, in which some deterministic animated squiggles dont bounce into (avoid) other animated squiggles.)
 
It logically follows that:
 
(Gazzaniga and Steven, p. 65, summarizing Dennetts Freedom Evolves, p. 56)
 
One just has to marvel at the sheer stupidity it takes to advance such an argument, much less base a 368-page book on it. I mean surely in the course of writing such a book you would come to notice that your core argument is based around a pun. (Shame also on Gazzaniga and Steven, who also base their argument on this absurd piece of logic.)
 
Yes, Daniel Dennett is literally arguing that because in some deterministic animations depict things being avoided, determinism does not imply inevitability. (It would seem an obvious corollary that Mickey Mouse has free will.)
 
Why do people still take this man seriously?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 19, 2008
 
I dont get the problem. What part of that dont you understand?
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
I guess to be more precise, I should ask where you think the contradiction is. Explaining that more carefully will help me identify more precisely what it is you dont understand. (Your implication that Mickey Mouse cartoons are a good example suggests to me youre confused about intentionality and perspective, I guess, but I cant say for sure. Partly because the prior sentence doesnt scan.)
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
I thought it was fairly obvious. The flaw in the argument is line 3, at least assuming we are using inevitable in its traditional sense in such discussions.
 
Basically, the fact the fact that an object in a deterministic world is avoidable in the sense that other deterministic-world objects appear to avoid it, does not mean it is evitable, in the sense that the deterministic object could do otherwise. Running through the argument with Mickey Mouse:
 
While the cartoon wall was, in principle, avoidable, it was inevitable that the deterministic Mickey Mouse would walk into it.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
Id expect you to know better than to waste time arguing about definitions with philosophers. Exactly how we define vague concepts like free will, evitability, or avoidability, doesnt really matter, since there isnt much to build on those definitions. They just dont seem to fit into a rigorous logical framework, so lets shrug, and focus on things that do.
 
Is there other work of Dennetts that frustrates you? In particular, what do you think of his theories about the Darwinian evolution of memes?
 
Cheers,
Andrey
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
Free will as most non-philosphers mean, is like Medival free-will. Here, agents are the pan-ultimate cause of their actions and they thus could not be predicted with a machine that knows everything about the present (arguably, then, the future is not entirely knowable).
 
Free will as compatibalist call it, is about the the will (attempt to perform actions) as being unconstrained. This is called Hobbian free-will.
 
-For the keen physicalists (where qualia are are subset of the physical, like gravity/fields and such), free willing agents dont feel constrained or oppressed. They feel how they are programmed to: if someone holds a gun to your head and takes your money, you will felt unfree, whereas if you are having fun with some freinds, even though it was determined physically a long time ago, it feels unconstrained.
-For the unkeen and foolish physicalists out there (who think robots=humans and CPU chip/AI complexity = consciousness), no coherent definition seems to be given.
 
So really, compatibalism is a misleading and confusing word. Determinism is not compatible with medival free-will, but it is compatible with Hobbian free-will.
 
Sowhat we have here are definition wars as usual ;)
 
posted by Aaron Schulz
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
Im not in a position to give advice or something, but: Aaron, do you really care? Why, if you do?
 
posted by ivan kurmanov
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
That has to be the most absurd definition of evitable (not to mention harms), Ive ever seen.
 
Jamie: please do explain.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
Im with some of the other commentators in that Ive never really understood why people feel so strongly about free will. Given that a universe with free will is indistiguishable from one without free will, it seems to me not to matter what we call our particular one.
 
But I did think (despite disliking the whole seventies-retro-feel that the game of life thing brings to the book) that Dennett had a point in the first 50 pages of his book. Humans are open systems, and our dynamics are not determined by knowledge of any small subset of the universe.
 
posted by tom s.
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
Im no fan of DD, but I would not base my criticism of him on a summary somebody else has written of one of his books. Have you read the actual book? (I havent, hence my lack of opinion on the subject).
 
posted by Bjrn
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
Why would Denett bother to argue that determinism doesnt imply that everything is un-dodge-able?  Thats a claim any incompatibilist would give him.  I cant believe he would be stupid enough to then go on and claim that inevitable-as-undodgeable = inevitable-as-had-to-happen-given-the-laws-of-physics-plus-initial-conditions; 
But if he doesnt, then theres really no point to giving this argument in the first place.  Maybe G&S misunderstood whatever he actually said?
 
posted by Liron Greenstein
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
the interesting stakes in this case is that gazzaniga uses dennetts argument to show that justice and law are relevant in a world of deterministic neurobiology, because our will is the underpinning of all european law.
 
to the extent that we choose evil without coersion its our societys right and obligation to punish us. we presume our moral decisions occur outside of the context of environmental forces - anything that forces the hand of an individual, even nature, removes personal responsibility and renders the legal system irrelevant. this is why we have coercion defenses and insanity pleas.
 
the avoider language is important- its specifically about avoiding committing crime. its really troubling to see a legal scholar grasping at straws like this. i have a roomba that wanders in a random walk around my house, but avoids falling down stairs due to a sensor. dennett and gazzaniga seem to be saying by extension, because of the existence and observed behavior of my robot, robots that do fall down stair have chosen to fall. therefore if falling were a crime, they could be prosecuted for it. of course, theres no will here, theres just a sensor, which is present or not, and working or not. these men have nothing based in the science and the medicine, merely defective logic based on knowing little about cellular automata, and a kind of willful semantic ignorance of the language they are using.
 
i dont think the argument for the legal system is as weak as gazzaniga makes it, but it points to medical research being highly disruptive to societys ideas of justice in the next few decades. i hope better arguments than dennetts are put to the task.
 
posted by q
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
I dont find this argument to be much dumber than Searles argument that computers cant be conscious because they arent brains (a brain, of course, being that which is conscious) - whatever the reason why you fail to see the stupidity of Searles argument, people probably fail to see the stupidity of Dennetts argument for the same (or a similar) reason.
 
posted by Mark
 on January 19, 2008 #
 
It seems evident that people, including Aaron, care about this because its another way of posing the question of (my paraphrasing) Do we have mystical souls of a divine nature (free will), or are we mere machines no different from computers (determinism)?
 
We are like computers == determinism
We are transcend physicality == free will
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on January 20, 2008 #
 
a) yes, the pun is terrible.
b) Andreys comment about wasting time arguing about definitions with philosophers is somewhat disconcerting. That sort of thinking goes a long way toward convincing me to not buy another philosophy book outside the classics, ever.
c) You all need to go contemplate the consequences of quantum mechanics and thermal physics (especially Brownian motion) on synapses and other cellular ligand-receptor systems. You should also contemplate how neurons, or small systems of neurons, will likely prove to be Turing complete. One example of how cells could be Turing complete (1) control: the universal DNA-RNA-protein dogma, (2) program: the unique cellular machinery of each neuron, (3) data: synaptic and interstitial inputs that stimulate the machinery to do things that lead to other outputs. Also contemplate the lossy nature of this biological computer: entropy, leaky integration, thermal losses, all conspire to insert a fair amount of random data into to Turing machines.
 
Along those lines, explain why psychoactive drugs work. I guarantee a person on clozaril and haldol will have a different set of thoughts one hour after the injections that they would if they hadnt taken the injections.
 
Im pretty sure that once the dust settles, maybe in this century, well find that while the neurons, or small sets of neurons, may be turing complete, theres simply to much quantum randomness in the brain (synaptic and interstitial) to advance any simple deterministic model, yet at the same time, it will be difficult to argue that the mind transcends the physical processes that occur within. If anything, we will probably extend the entity which is the person to include the whole person. You lose your pinky toe, youll have different thoughts. You may still be able to work on high level math or debate the merits of the death penalty, but if you loose part of your pancreas, or a kidney, the chemistry of the interstitial fluid in your brain will be oh so slightly different, or will degrade more quickly over time. Something will change in your thinking.
 
In a very real way, you can manipulate your own future thoughts be manipulating your current environment. If you start buying fewer processed snack foods then youll be less likely to think about weight loss programs in 20 years. Of course, youve been manipulating your own thoughts for years. Or have you? Where did the first manipulations come from? Or were those simply the condensations of many random events that piled up over time, influenced, remember, by environmental stimuli too, environmental stimuli that have been effecting your outcomes all the way since your mothers eggs stopped reproducing while she was in utero, leading to decisions her body made about which oocyte follicles would mature, and your fathers net pH the night you were conceived, leading to a subtle shift in which spermatocytes could gain entry to the maternal oocyte, on which night, and whether or not she drank that night, which might affect, slightly, when your neural tube closed, and some weeks later, how much glucose she had on board when it was time for your heart to start beating  did it start a few minutes later, slowing the rate of division of neurons in your brain for a few moments?
 
While the whole thing may be deterministic, after allowing for quantum mechanics and initial conditions, the machines are so numerous that the system is so complex that the only functional way to get through life is to act on what we perceive to be free will. The Greens fMRI results of the trolley problem hint at this.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on January 20, 2008 #
 
Mark: Maybe because thats not Searles argument.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 20, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
Its much more honest to do another post professing your love of Searle then to call Dennett dumb.  As has been pointed out, you have probably done very little to read any Dennett without an agenda going in.  Dennett has written books which do have content that is not personal attacks, e.g. many people familar with his recent work Breaking the Spell.
 
There is a temptation to suggest, and I will succomb to it, that you are embarrassed by how much you are an advocate of Searle.  Your post does not mention the name but the dsquared quote that you dug from 2002 did not finish this sentence:
 
Dennett had been pretty (no, make that very) badly behaved when it came to falsely attributing strawman positions to John Searle, and not admitting it when corrected.
 
Now someone has brought up the question of why you are so concerned about the issues of determinism and free will.  I am curious about this also.  In your article about the game you leapt rather quickly to the notion that we are so much more than machine.  What are you so worried about?  Determinism versus free will is an old concern and lots of people have moved on to more reasonable debates.  From my point of view, we know its far too hard to predict relatively simple phenomenon (on our scale length, ignore the fact that quantum mechanics is probablistic) compared with humans.  Why bash Dennett when all you want to say is that you are a real boy?
 
posted by Jeremy Corbett
 on January 20, 2008 #
 
I disliked Dennett long before Id read anything by Searle, so I do not think your explanation is true. Its true that Searle is something of the anti-Dennett, but I think thats more of an explanation of why I like Searle than why I dislike Dennett.
 
Im not worried about free will (in this piece); this just happens to be the example someone showed to me.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 22, 2008 #
 
BTW, I think its intriguing that nobody (save perhaps Jamie) has tried to defend the argument. Everyones either: attacked me personally for one reason or another, attacked the choice of subject (certainly not mine!), etc.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 22, 2008 #
 
Ill repeat Bjorns question: Aaron, have you read Freedom Evolves?
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on January 22, 2008 #
 
Aaron, I passed on the argument itself explicity because I dont think its really at issue. I was clear on that. But its not really surprising that if you make a blog post along the lines of so-and-so is dumb because of complicated philosophical argument, the most attention is drawn by the so-and-so is dumb part rather than the complicated philosophical argument.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on January 23, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
Im not surprised that you disagree with my characterization of Searles argument, but I have not been able to understand it in any other way, even after asking him personally about it when I saw him speak several months ago.
 
I asked him why a computer simulation of a brain couldnt be (or contain) consciousness, and his response, verbatim, was simulations leave something out.  If his position is that any conceivable simulation of a brain must leave something out, it is hard to imagine what the something must be if not gooey gray and white matter.  IOW, computers cant be conscious because they arent made of the same stuff as brains.
 
If Im misunderstanding Searle, do enlighten me.
 
posted by Mark
 on January 23, 2008 #
 
Searles argument is this:
 
Do you have a way for the laws of physics to detect sufficiently complicated simulations?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 23, 2008 #
 
P.S. FWIW, much experience has taught me that accosting people after talks with counterarguments is about the worst way of getting an intelligent response.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 23, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
That argument displays the exact circularity Im talking about.  How do the physics of consciousness know that they have to attach to a brain that is conscious, but not a brain that is not conscious?  (Such as one of a person in deep sleep, a coma, recently deceased, or, say, the brain of a mosquito).  Do you have a way for the laws of physics to detect sufficiently complicated neural activity?
 
(This is notwithstanding that there is no reason for anyone to accept the existence of qualia in the first place, though I assume that is a premise of Searles argument.)
 
By the way, I didnt accost Searle, I asked a question during the Q&A session, and it was very much in the context of what hed been talking about.
 
posted by Mark
 on January 24, 2008 #
 
How do the laws of physics attach conscious to awake people but not to people who are knocked out? Clearly the brain must be doing something specific to cause consciousness when were awake and do it differently or fail to do it when were knocked out. This is biological naturalism. Clearly this cant be the case for simulations, since a computer can be simulated by an appropriate series of ping pong balls and flippers and it seems pretty obvious that those dont do anything special to cause consciousnes.
 
You dont have qualitative experiences? I dont believe you.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 24, 2008 #
 
Why is it obvious that neurons do something to cause consciousness, but obvious that ping pong balls and flippers dont?  This is why I summarized Searles argument as computers cant be conscious because they arent brains.  (pretty much any time you use clearly in a philosophical argument, you are using it to mask some unfounded assumption).
 
I have qualitative experiences.  I have no evidence that they are the result of a physical substance that has attached to my brain.  That part is pure speculation, like the ether of victorian science.
 
Anyway, the point here is not for us to rehash tired arguments about consciousness.  My point was to illustrate that you are making some assumption that makes Searles arguments sensical, and Dennetts nonsensical.  I dont particularly like either of their viewpoints, but I dont attribute that to their stupidity, I attribute it to their different starting assumptions.
 
posted by Mark
 on January 24, 2008 #
 
Because people are conscious and ping pong balls are not. Do you disagree?
 
Whats your alternative?
 
Yes, youre right, Im assuming people are conscious, ping balls arent, and that my subjective experiences are connected to my brain. I dont think most Dennett fans would disagree with any of those, though.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 24, 2008 #
 
Aaron, Ive mentioned before, I think youre committing a fallacy of pathological reductionism.
 
Its like saying A picture cant be made up of tiny little dots, because looking at each little dot, nobody can tell if its part of a picture or a just a random blob.
 
A human body cant be a bunch of atoms, because looking at an atom, nobody can tell if its part of a human body or a rock
 
Hence - A brain cant be a big computer, because looking at each circuit, nobody can tell if its part of a human mind or a video game.
 
I cant see how you can reasonably ignore all the evidence from neurology, in favor of a slippery phrased bit of pontification that should be approached with suspicion on vagueness alone.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on January 24, 2008 #
 
Aaron,
 
Youre comparing apples to atoms.  Yes, its obvious people are conscious and ping pong balls arent.  But nobody is suggesting that ping pong balls (or transistors), individually, could become conscious.  The question is about large collections of them.
 
A more valid comparison for you to have made would have been Because neurons are conscious and ping pong balls arent.  Do you disagree?, to which I would have answered yes, I disagree, because I dont think an isolated neuron is (or can be) conscious, any more than I think an isolated transistor can be conscious.
 
And if you think an isolated neuron is conscious, I dont see how you can defend that position by any means other than repeated assertion, since no isolated neuron has ever been observed to displayed any sign of consciousness.
 
posted by Mark
 on January 24, 2008 #
 
I dont think an isolated neuron is conscious.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on January 24, 2008 #
 
I think that the term physics of conciousness is rather dubious.  Are there any solid results from the physics of conciousness or are they some philosophical conjectures dressed up as physics?
 
posted by Jeremy Corbett
 on January 26, 2008 #
 
weighing into the consciousness debate
Fodor had a nice response to Searle. Imagine putting a little metal wrapper on each axon, and another one on each dendrite.  This wrapper mediates all neuron-to-neuron connections. A signal travels down a neuron, hits a wrapper, the wrapper passes neurotransmitter-simulator to the other wrapper, which interprets it and sends the corresponding signal on the next neuron.  One would think that, even if all of our neurons were wrapped this way, wed still be conscious.  Its hard to imagine why not; the same stuff is going on in our neurons; only the space between them has some mediating interaction.
 
But once we start mediating our neuronal interactions with a neurotransmitter-simulator, we can imagine replacing just about everything in our brain with simulators made of metal (or ping-pong-ball plastic or whatever you like), and as long as all these things are performing functions that are isomorphic to brain functions in the right way, wed be conscious.  So machines with such brains would also be conscious.
 
And anyway, biological naturalism doesnt necessarily follow from the Chinese Room computers-cant-be-conscious argument.  If Searles right that the Chinese Room is in fact isomorphic enough to what the computer (or any turing machine) is doing to rule out conscious computers, then maybe the brain isnt a turing machine.  Then we need to find out what it is and make a machine like it.
 
posted by Liron Greenstein
 on February  1, 2008 #
 
Aaron
 
1. In some deterministic worlds there are avoiders avoiding harms.
 
Doesnt the logic fail here itself? The implicit assumption that avoiders avoid harms means they are conscious of harm to avoid it.
 
Cheers,
Arunn
 
posted by Arunn
 on February 11, 2008 #
 
I dont know man. When I was immersed in the book the argument was subtle and thought provoking. I guess more things are involved here for you to dismiss it with such hubris. Be careful, you seem to be quite good on the writing personal attacks on other philosophers you say to hate of DD.
 
In any case, cheer up. Seriously. So young and already full of such vitriol?
 
posted by elzr
 on April  5, 2008 #
 
Hi I kinda think youve missed the point of Dennetts talk of evitability.  He doesnt claim to be providing what you call Medieval free will with this example but instead to be showing that the lack of medieval free will does not mean that we lack all sorts of free will.  The point of Freedom evolves is to show that evitability or free will can exist within a deterministic world and to argue that it is these forms of free will that are the morally   important ones.
 
posted by Harry Farmer
 on April 14, 2008 #
 
Liron writes:
 
Fodor had a nice response to Searle. Imagine putting a little metal wrapper on each axon, and another one on each dendrite.  [] One would think that, even if all of our neurons were wrapped this way, wed still be conscious.  Its hard to imagine why not; the same stuff is going on in our neurons; only the space between them has some mediating interaction.
 
Searle responds to this in a later book. He does not think that wed still be conscious if all our neurons were wrapped this way. Assuming wed still be conscious under these circumstances is tantamount to assuming biological naturalism is false, since biological naturalism suggests theres a biological process other than pure neuronal interaction that leads to consciousness.
 
And anyway, biological naturalism doesnt necessarily follow from the Chinese Room computers-cant-be-conscious argument.  If Searles right that the Chinese Room is in fact isomorphic enough to what the computer (or any turing machine) is doing to rule out conscious computers, then maybe the brain isnt a turing machine.  Then we need to find out what it is and make a machine like it.
 
Searle explicitly says we probably can make conscious machines; he just says Turing machines arent conscious. He agrees with you entirely on this point.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 17, 2008 #
 
As I said, by the physics of consciousness I mean qualia  the physical fact that I have conscious subjective experiences. This is so different from every other physical process weve studied that I dont see how it could exist without its own physical basis.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 17, 2008 #
 
Let me give you a piece of advice, Aaron: When you come across an argument that doesnt make sense to you, assume that the failure is yours, not the authors. This applies especially when the author is someone like Daniel Dennett, and it applies especially when other smart people dont make a fuss about it (or at least no the simple-minded fuss that you make). Youre like a non-physicist who comes across Einsteins theory of relativity and exclaims: How could mass possibly be related to energy like that? What an idiot  how could anyone take Einstein seriously?!? Meanwhile, smart people, educated people, read Einstein and conclude: Brilliant!
 
posted by Phillip Torres
 on July 28, 2008 #
 
Accusing someone of making personal attacks and being dumb, and then attacking him personally followed by a few lines of dumbness is really dumb, so I thought I might as well attack you personally on it.
 
posted by 
 on October  1, 2009 #
 
Let me give you a piece of advice, Aaron: When you come across an argument that doesnt make sense to you, assume that the failure is yours, not the authors. This applies especially when the author is someone like Daniel Dennett, and it applies especially when other smart people dont make a fuss about it (or at least no the simple-minded fuss that you make). Youre like a non-physicist who comes across Einsteins theory of relativity and exclaims: How could mass possibly be related to energy like that? What an idiot  how could anyone take Einstein seriously?!? Meanwhile, smart people, educated people, read Einstein and conclude: Brilliant! 
 
Oh yeah. Now we have Ayatollah Daniel Dennett. Wow on you if you use your own brains and
point out a few of his blunders, because his followers are Smart and Educated People. What a brilliant argument.
 
posted by qualia
 on September 22, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 15, 2008
 
Title: Introducing theinfo.org
 
A lot of the work Ive been doing on Open Library for the past few months has to do with handling large quantities of data. Either Im writing crawlers to download them from various public web sites, or Im meeting with librarians to persuade them to give me copies, or Im evaluating algorithms for processing them, or building tools for viewing it all.
 
And while Ive been doing this for information about books, Ive noticed my friends doing similar things in other fields. Reporters try to get large data sets to write stories. Programmers get large data sets to add features to their sites. Friends are trying to make available data about the inner workings of the government.
 
And while each community has ways of talking to each other  reporters talking to other reporters, RDF people talking to other RDF people, library hackers talking to other library hackers  theres no community that cuts across these topical lines. And thats too bad, because theres a lot there we could share, from tips on how not to get caught when crawling to tools to make it easier to build big charts and maps.
 
So thats why Ive started a new community site for people who work with large data sets. Its called theinfo.org and Id really appreciate it if you joined the mailing lists and spread the word.
 
http://theinfo.org/
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 15, 2008
 
Great idea Aaron. Im a consultant working on international trade agreements. The availability of comprehensive data sets on trade flows, trade barriers and production/demographic data has transformed the making and analysis of international trade relations in the two or three decades that Ive been at it.
 
There are some very large data sets accessible via the Web. But in this domain they can be SO large that its difficult to access them via the web (the bandwidth problem is only the start).
 
Ill keep an eye out for developments here (thanks very much for the link to CKAN, by the way. Didnt know about that).
 
Best,
 
Peter
 
posted by Peter Gallagher
 on January 15, 2008 #
 
Where were you 6 months ago when we started dreaming up RescueTime (YC08)?  
 
Thanks for doing this  Eager to see how it shapes up.
 
posted by Tony Wright
 on January 15, 2008 #
 
Cool beans. This is pretty much my job.
 
BTW, markup isnt being processed correctly on user pages: http://theinfo.org/user/Harkins
 
posted by Peter Harkins
 on January 15, 2008 #
 
Hi Aaron!
 
Looks like another good idea to me. Unfortunately, I have stopped working on this project, but theinfo.org reminded me of my own http://www.idealliance.org/papers/xmle02/dx_xmle02/papers/04-03-03/04-03-03.html that I had almost forgotten
 
Good luck in this new project.
 
Eric
 
posted by Eric van der Vlist
 on January 16, 2008 #
 
I posted a long list of dataset links for you at the datawrangling blog.  They need to be cleaned up and organized, but Im sure some infoers with more time on their hands can wikify them
 
posted by Peter Skomoroch
 on January 18, 2008 #
 
Lots of possible datasets.
http://www.trustlet.org/wiki/Trust_network_datasets
http://www.trustlet.org/wiki/Repositories_of_datasets
 
Highly unsorted and messy ;(
 
I subscribed to the theinfo mailing list by the way.
 
posted by paolo
 on January 18, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January  5, 2008
 
Title: 2007 Review of Books
 
Previously: 2006
 
This year I only read 70 books, down from over 120 last year. I guess thats not too bad considering this was the Year of Other People  I still beat my general goal of 52. Once again, here are the books that struck me as completely worth reading. This year, though, Ive intermixed them with the other books I read:
 
The original Nickeled and Dimed, Orwell lives as a plonguer and a tramp in Paris and London respectively. The descriptions of such poor conditions are typically riveting and a great deal of fascinating reflection is included throughout.
 
Hugh Laurie, the British actor (Americans know him as Gregory House, M.D.), takes his first crack at writing in this comic novel. (The novel was originally sent to publishers under a pseudonym to avoid celebrity favoritism, but naturally sales forced him to publish it under his real name.) The plot is a fairly standard spy-guns thriller, although very well executed, but the books brilliance is the way it adeptly undermines its own cliched language, to hilarious effect. In that way its a lot like the British TV comedy People Like Us (itself well worth seeing). A good, fun read.
 
This book combines, in abbreviated form, the arguments in all of Searles work up to the time of its publication (which is basically everything except Rationality in Action). In doing so, it basically has all the hallmarks of Searles work, only more so: a clear exposition of complex philosophical ideas that demonstrates how to think better, useful tools to help you understand your world better, and genuine philosophical solutions that let you resolve confusions you may have had before. And all of it is done with Searles customary wit and style  almost an anti-style, like that of D. J. Bernstein, in which he simply explains things clearly and concisely. A model of public philosophy.
 
A strong, fun novel, packed with interesting ideas and characters and gimmicks, telling the story of people I love to read about: jetsetting academics. Im normally not one for novels, but I have to admit it: Lodge makes it work. My only caveat is that this is part of a trilogy and one should probably read the first book, Changing Places, first, since later books refer back.
 
Short, meaningful, and elegant. More than you could reasonably expect from such a book.
 
Including this is not quite right, because I cannot actually recommend this book without reservation. Alinsky is an anecdotalist, not a writer, and the first half of the book drags as he forces himself to come up with some general platitudes and lecture the youth of today. The second half, however, is incredibly fun and gives you an excitement and energy about accomplishing things with power politics that you just cant get anywhere else.
 
Sadly, there arent any good alternatives I can recommend. Alinskys biography, Let Them Call Me Rebel by Sanford Horwitt, is quite good but has a few serious failings. First, it drags a great deal in the middle between the beginning of Alinskys career, in which he worked for Al Capone as research for his University of Chicago sociology dissertation, and the end, when he organized the black neighborhoods of Chicago and Rochester to fight the white establishment. During these middle years, Alinsky didnt do much except watch three wives get sick and die and the book spends several hundred pages watching it happen. (Also, frustratingly, the book seems to be exhausted by the time it gets to the interesting end part and covers it in less detail than one would like.) Furthermore, the biographer apparently has come to severely disapprove of his subject, especially his habit of exaggerating or inventing stories about himself, that his disapproving tone takes all the fun out of the action.
 
Another possible alternative is Michael Gecans Going Public. Gecan is one of the top people in the Industrial Areas Foundation, the foundation Alinsky started and ran for most his life. Going Public is his attempt to go back to writing (apparently his college career) and tell the stories of the battles he fought as an IAF organizer. Gecan has much more of a flair for writing than Alinsky, but never got the chance to develop his editing skill, and the result is an uneven, sometimes overwritten, book. Also, Gecans IAF is much more watered down than Alinskys ever was and some of his tactics just seem downright silly.
 
Theres also Alinskys first book, Reveille for Radicals, but this can be dismissed as coming out during the early part of career, before some of the most fun stuff. So, because of the extreme importance it had on this year and because I have no serious alternatives, I have to recommend Rules for Radicals, along with everyone else.
 
I read this entire novel in one sitting and it touched me in a profound way. It asks what it means to dedicate your life to writing, by looking at four people who come together, each of which has taken a different position in the New York intellectual scene. Its also recently out at a film, which is a very bizarre experience to watch, because the book takes place almost entirely in the characters heads while the film will have none of that and only shows the brute actions. Im not sure other people will have the same experience I did, but as a writer I found this book very powerful. By the same token, Im looking forward to this years All the Sad Young Literary Men (and gleefully downing the new issue of n+1).
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  5, 2008
 
s/Norton/Morton
 
posted by Bill Mill
 on January  5, 2008 #
 
Then you have to read all three books
 
Changing Places, Small World, and Nice Work
 
posted by toivo
 on January  5, 2008 #
 
I do not understand the Searle factor here, there are so many first class American philosophers worth reading: David Lewis, Sydney Shoemaker, John Rawls, Hilary Putnam, Quine Or was it a Searle seminar? What is the point?
 
posted by Attila Csordas
 on January  5, 2008 #
 
What I suggest wholeheartedly: Robert Nozick: Philosophical Explanations, Chapter 6: Philosophy and the meaning of life. or a softer version: Examined life. If you are looking for a classic: Bertrand Russell on logical atomism or on Berkeley.
 
posted by Attila Csordas
 on January  5, 2008 #
 
Im almost ashamed of how little reading I do after reading this.  Pretty much all of my reading is done on the bus to and from school.  Thanks for the inspiration.  Maybe in a month or two I will make it my goal to read 10 books in 30 days.  (February is the RPM Challenge, and I still havent decided whether I want to participate in that.)
 
posted by John
 on January 24, 2008 #
 
Nice list.  Do you feel that you have read a lot or little compared to others.  (A real lot compared to my reading list).
 
Has reading and writing always been your passion?
 
How has the most recent reading list changed your perspective?
 
posted by Berlin Brown
 on January 25, 2008 #
 
Nice list.  Do you feel that you have read a lot or little compared to others.  (A real lot compared to my reading list).
 
I suspect I read a lot more than the average person, but less than the people Im trying to imitate (social science academics).
 
Has reading and writing always been your passion?
 
I hadnt really thought about it that way, but I guess so.
 
How has the most recent reading list changed your perspective?
 
Its hard to make such broad judgments about a reading list.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 17, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January  2, 2008
 
Title: 2007 Review of Projects
 
In August I noted that I had taken on an enormous number of projects and did not suspect they would all succeed. (It has since been pointed out to me that one of the secrets of successful people is that they try a lot of projects and then you only see the successes. So perhaps this is not as bad a strategy as I initially thought.) Now that the year has come to a close, I thought I would review the projects I mentioned there and see how they were doing.
 
Open Library: Moderate success. Open Library has a team of six or so people working on it. Its not progressing as quickly as I would like, but it is progressing. The demo site has launched and there are no big hurdles in our path. Personally, Ive learned an enormous amount about managing projects.
 
Memoir: Failed. At the end of last year, I planned to start this year to take a week to write a memoir of life at Reddit. The writing proceeded on schedule but towards the middle of the week I fell terribly ill, realized I would not be happy with the resulting book, and reluctantly abandoned it. Why did it fail? There were lots of mid-level reasons (Im not that interesting a subject, my memory of the period was poor, I was doing it with impure motives) but the fundamental one was that I just did not honestly believe a memoir of my time at Reddit was a book that was worth reading. I only lost a couple days, so this was not a devastating failure.
 
Psychology book: On hold. After the Reddit book, I begun researching and outlining a book about the highlights of psychology. I am still interested in this book and think about it a fair amount, but I put the project on hold after I started work on Open Library.
 
Another book: Unknown. In the other post I said I was working on three books. I cant remember what the third one is now. I think about different books a lot but I dont think Ive pursued any others very seriously.
 
Consult on Berkeley Big Ideas: Failed. I had no big ideas for helping this project and I did not follow through on finding any. I had made no strong commitments, so I do not consider this a serious failure.
 
JobBook: Intermediate. An initial site is launched but I have not spent a lot of time on it nor is it progressing rapidly. Other people are pursuing it, though, so I feel less pressure.
 
Science That Matters: Intermediate. This site has launched and a fair number of posts have been written, but it hasnt been updated in a while and nobody else has really joined seriously. But the site hasnt been officially abandoned, so its not a total failure.
 
Jottit: Moderate success. The site was finished and launched and got incredibly positive reviews but hasnt really caught fire with traffic yet. Perhaps this is because its a great product that no one wants to use or perhaps we simply havent figured out how to market it yet. (If you want to try to market it, contact me@aaronsw.com.)
 
Statful: Intermediate. This was a project I mentored for Summer of Code to allow for better web stats visualization. I was a fairly bad mentor, in retrospect. A fair amount of the coding got done for this project but I did not have a clear design in place ahead of time so the software is not especially usable. If any readers want to help work on the design for a free software web stats analyzer (you know, something that will tell you whos visiting your site) please email me@aaronsw.com. I still think the project is finishable but it certainly has languished for a while.
 
Seddit: Failure. This was the other Summer of Code project. The code got written but not tested or launched and has since languished. The schedule budgeted time for launching the project but apparently not enough. I think the lesson here is that in such projects launching should be done first and features added later, so that whatever results is usable. Also, I should be a better mentor.
 
Gmail clone: Failure. I got a couple of people started working on this project but I didnt follow through because I felt too overloaded. However, people have since pointed me to Posterity and Sup. Again, the consequences werent too bad. I wasted some peoples time, but not an enormous amount.
 
Book reader: Intermediate. I finished 70% of this but never launched it. Just never got around to it. The same was true of a number of other web projects.
 
Journalism: Success. I had two articles published for money and a third is on its way to the editor.
 
Paper: Intermediate. Plagued by difficulties, the paper has been teetering on the brink of failure for another year. I think a big problem was not having a partner who had enough time to push me about it more.
 
Novel: Intermediate. I had to stop working on the novel when I got sick but I mostly did it on time when I was OK and a shocking number of people seemed to actually read it. I will try to finish it early this year.
 
All in all, I think it was a fairly mixed year project-wise. A couple minor failures, a couple minor successes, and a couple big projects where time will tell. In truth, it may be too soon to evaluate this year. If Open Library becomes a big success, this year will have been well worthwhile. Otherwise, its legacy will be more mixed.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  2, 2008
 
Sounds like you had a massively successful year, by ordinary standards. Congratulations.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on January  2, 2008 #
 
Wow. Nevertheless an impressive list. I think youre absolutely right about the many failures of successful people. Scott Adams mentioned something along those lines in his blog.
 
Anyway, I loved reading Bubble City  is there any chance you continue working on it? Chapter 11 isnt an appropriate ending.
 
posted by Daniel Beck
 on January  2, 2008 #
 
Jottit is the kind of site which I havent used since I first tried it, but some day Ill need it and Ill be screwed if it isnt there.
 
Whats the model for Jottit, anyway? A place for people to use often or a place for people to have available? Maybe a combination of both kind of users?
 
posted by geego
 on January  2, 2008 #
 
Are these projects all you do, or in addition to a full-time job?
 
posted by JohnO
 on January  2, 2008 #
 
Its in Ruby, not Python, but could you be thinking of sup as your GMail killer?
 
http://sup.rubyforge.org/
 
posted by Joe W.
 on January  3, 2008 #
 
Keep plugging away.  When the wikimedia foundation didnt elect you to the board, they made an indescribable misstep.
 
posted by Ben Yates
 on January  3, 2008 #
 
I sent you the link of Posterity, a web-based email system.
 
http://posterity.edgewall.org/
 
posted by Anand Chitipothu
 on January  4, 2008 #
 
Hello Aaron,
 
I really wonder why you ask how to market Jottit. Did the Reddit experience taught you anything in this regard ? The answer would definitely interest me, it does not have to be some memoir !-), but it would be useful I think.
 
Cheers,
 
Matthieu
 
posted by Matthieu
 on January  4, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 28, 2007
 
Title: Starting Out in the Morning
 
Thats how you discover a persons true nature, someone in Starting Out in the Evening thinks: by the way she wakes up in the morning.
 
For a long time, I have woken up in the morning with nothing. Recently, because I have been sick. Before that, because I was split up among many jobs. Before that, because I nominally had a real job. I miss the days when I woke up with purpose, when I lived to toil at some grand accomplishment. The feeling that all of life is in the service of some larger goal. Its fantastic.
 
I have been finally getting over my too-long illness, nursing myself back to strength by reading. When I was a kid, I used to take Saturdays to read, really read, devouring five or six books in one sitting. I havent read like that in years, but now Im doing it again  checking out stacks of books from the library and setting upon them one by one. Its fantastic.
 
And I dont just breeze thru the pages, I roll around in bed and pace the floor and sit in the bath fighting my brain around their words, knowing that theres some way it all makes sense, some way it can fit together, if only I can summon the strength to grab it. I wake up with thoughts of books in my heads, questions, anecdotes, stories. Its fantastic.
 
I feel like the books are bringing me back  back not only to health, but to the world of thought and action, the world of accomplishment, the world of doing something grand with oneself. Its fantastic.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 28, 2007
 
Okay, Ill bite. What are you reading?
 
posted by mp
 on December 29, 2007 #
 
Good to hear that you are getting better. Five or six books in one sitting? How can you do that without just breezing thru the pages? Please share us with your secret some day
 
posted by Isao
 on December 29, 2007 #
 
Real life doesnt generally fit together  too bad about that  but in drama we expect it to.  In real life its been way too long since i could read a chapter or two of Bubble City while i sip my green tea latte at Starbucks :(
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on December 29, 2007 #
 
Your enthusiasm is contagious. Thank you. :-)
 
posted by Chris
 on December 29, 2007 #
 
Man, this post made me want to drop the thing Im writing and go back to reading history - history of literature, history of science, general history, I used to eat those books like candy.  Good times.
 
posted by Curt Hoyt
 on December 30, 2007 #
 
Good to hear, Aaron.  I hope you remain in good spirits.
 
posted by Matt Blodgett
 on December 31, 2007 #
 
In a perfect world everybody would wake up wanting to find a grander purpose in life. The only thing I can do is try and perfect my little world. Glad others are doing the same.
 
posted by Glenn
 on January  2, 2008 #
 
Wanting is one reason for subjunctive and delay.
 
In a perfect world, everybody HAS a grander purpose in his or her life, based on rights and responsibilitites.
The world acts as one, composed of endless unique  evolving and passing -  to create the best future.
Beyond incompatible religions and (ego-)complexes (injuries/unsatisfied needs) and injustice anybody can go for his or her personal talents - and does so, because this makes happy.
How sad that anybody thinks a system that produces the need to fight against itself might be the right interpretation of an enlightened humans word.
Its like cancer, if you regard one for all.
Dangerous but curable.
 
A perfect world? Replace perfect: evolving healthily. Happy caring creatives.
 
All the best for the future and healing for the past, by the way!
 
posted by Lilo
 on January  2, 2008 #
 
Aprospos by the way, Aaron: You can discover a persons ACTUAL nature by the way she wakes up in the morning.
I had a big part of my childhood and sometimes have the same experience of reading - when I take the time to celebrate my addiction to reading :-)
In combination with all the other great things to experience and do. (Take care for the balance ;-))
Fantastic, yes!!
But as the morning IS so important - what I expect of my morning is an everyday is birthday feeling. Like in childhood, do some of you remember? You wake up and have to kick your legs and arms and jump out of your bed to spread all the happiness and excitement throughout your body: A bright new day, I can do whatever I want - and I immediately have a plan what exactly to go for today.
 
posted by Julia
 on January  2, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 24, 2007
 
Title: The Theory of The Game
 
I have to admit, theres a part of me that gets no small enjoyment out of the fact that the first piece I wrote for a paying publication is nominally a review of a book on pick-up artists that actually ends up spending most of its time on glosses the history of American dating, discussions of foundational experiments in control of the emotions, the history of behaviorism in psychology, and the computer functionalist philosophy of mind. In other words, the typical article for Other.
 
I originally planned to post the review here to my blog, but instead I bumped into Annalee Newitz while I was writing it, she expressed interest in it so I sent her the draft I had and next thing I knew it was getting included in the next issue of the magazine. Reading back over it, Im not sure I have a more to say in its favor other than its definitely the weirdest review of The Game that will likely ever be published.
 
A couple paragraphs got removed in the print version I have and the editors added subheads to break up the flow, but heres the original piece as I sent it to them:
 
The Theory of The Game
 
For a couple of weeks, it seemed like all my friends were reading a thick black book with a leather cover and gold-edged pages. Is that The Bible? I finally asked them. It might as well be, said one. Its a guide to picking up girls, another explained. I scrunched my face. Oh, no no no, the smartest one there said. Think of it as an ethnography of a community of pick-up artists. (More)
 
If you like this kind of thing, consider picking up a copy of Other magazine, available in indie bookstores across San Francisco and thru the web site.
 
(Explanation in advance: I know fans of computer functionalism (what a weblog to have such readers!) are going to attack me for my oversimplification of their views. Well, if you want, Im happy to attack your views at length and the conclusion comes out basically the same. So bring it on.)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 24, 2007
 
Thats a good review, Aaron. The AI comparison is spot-on: solving the same problem by vastly different means.
 
posted by improbable
 on December 24, 2007 #
 
Tyler Durden is the character played by Brad Pitt in Fight Club. Coincidence?
 
posted by C Rose
 on December 24, 2007 #
 
Well, I indeed believe your review suffers from some amount of mysticism stemming from your AI views. For example, here Id say youre in part knocking down a strawman here:
 
Instead, the AI proponents cheer loudly every time someone gets a computer to do something we think of as a human task. Aha! they proclaim. Computers can beat humans at chess. How can we deny them humanity now?
 
While there are pundits who would say that silly thing, you know serious researchers into cognition understand the difference between means and ends. To take a simple example, walking is in fact a very complicated task, and its very difficult to make a machine walk like humans do. But nobody claims walking embodies some deep aspect of the human condition which cant ever be done by a machine, and that accomplishing getting from point A to point B by driving is the same thing.
 
Anyway, its very doubtful how much the elaborate theory of the PUAs is in fact true, as opposed to mumbo-jumbo tossed on top of some very simple stuff - If you want to pick up girls in bars, sound halfway interesting and dont be a jerk (as well as some unpleasant stuff about the realities of the bar scene). Youd think, given the environment, someone would try some experiments. But there would be very little marketing incentive to report to that group that its nonsense, a kind of placebo effect.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on December 24, 2007 #
 
From what youve written, I cant tell if you are asserting that computers will never be able to replicate the functioning of the human brain or rather that a computer that does so will still be missing some magic ingredient required for human being-ness. Both of these assertions are non-obvious and I personally would like to see at least a precise argument for one of them: what, for example, does the fact that Deep Blue doesnt mimic human thought processes tell us about the prospects for doing so?
 
It also seems to me that you are conflating two different research agendas when you talk about AI. One attempts to build computer systems that are good at things that humans can also do (like play chess or understand natural language) and the other attempts to replicate exactly what human brains do. The former seems to be the focus of most current AI research and the latter to my knowledge is pursued by scientists studying the brain. If you are proposing that there are fundamental limits to what either of these research programs can accomplish, it would be interesting to know what exactly those limits are and why you believe they exist.
 
Anyway, thanks for the interesting article!
 
posted by ALaughRamp
 on December 24, 2007 #
 
Good stuff.
 
J. B. Watson and B. F. Skinner begun denying it existed
 
Began.  (I assume youll want to correct this because you
corrected the same use of begun in chapter 3 of Bubble
City.  [Hope to see more Bubble City soon, BTW.])
 
Skinner intended Walden Two as a utopia, but the story
  reads like a dystopia more frightening than even Brave New
  World.
 
Indeed!  Ironically, though, Huxley wrote (in Brave New
World Revisited if I remember correctly) something to the
effect of to prevent my dystopia from happening for real,
we need to implement the ideas of B.F. Skinner!  (Im
pretty sure he was serious.)
 
posted by Aaron Brown
 on December 24, 2007 #
 
The review of the PUA material was pretty much spot-on.  Very few PUAs take a step back from the material and try to understand why its working; they use it, it works, so they just keep doing it.  Really, all it does is take away your fear - fear of the unknown (script the entire conversation!) and fear of rejection (treat it as an experiment!).  Any guy whos unafraid and at least somewhat interesting will have about the same success level as a master PUA.  As far as I can tell, the whole Alpha Male mythology thats layered over the top of those basic truths has little to no scientific basis.
 
Anyone could also overcome those fears by just going to bars over and over, and it wouldnt take a smart guy very long to figure out the scene, but to most guys, thats an absolutely terrifying ordeal.
 
posted by Curt Hoyt
 on December 28, 2007 #
 
It seems to me that the author of this article is full of his own assumptions and biases which prevent him from seeing things with more nuanced goggles.
 
The pick-up artist, by following a script of interesting-sounding things to say, by bringing props that the girl can easily comment on, by basically orchestrating the entire conversation in advance, comes into this room of copycats like a breath of fresh air.
 
OK, that a fair enough statement, but then he starts to tear it down as if its especially inauthentic, manipulative and deceitful.
 
Wow, this guy is so different, you think The guy isnt especially interesting; hes just bothered to pick up a script.
 
If the girl thinks the guy is interesting, who is the author to argue that hes not? Maybe the author never gotten a reaction from a girl like that on his own, so he assumes that anyone who IS able to get strong positive feedback from a girl must be cheating. But whats unfair about improving ones game? Nearly any opening line is a canned statement. Asking a girl for a drink, asking if she comes here often, telling her shes really beautiful are all prepared statements designed to elicit a certain response. The problem with the authors analysis, as I see it, is that he assumes captivating openings which makes one stand out from the crowd are deceptive, which I think is total bunk.
 
As you might guess, a system based upon treating women as objects and works by discovering ways to deceive them doesnt really work over the long-term. But when youre picking up new girls every night, it takes a while to notice that.
 
Treating women as objects and discovering ways to deceive them? Whats especially deceptive about asking two girls if they prefer chocolate or flowers? Or if they think women lie more than men? Or if they think its OK for men to wear pink? How do you suggest we open a conversation? Maybe tell them, Ive never been with a girl and I want you to be my first. That might be honest but is it interesting and effective?
 
So the author divides people into two groups: those who treat women like objects and deceive them with prepared stories and those who dont. But not all prepared openings need to be deceptive or especially demeaning to a person. Making lewd statements, belitting someone, using intimidation, sexually harassing someonethose are ways of treating someone like an object, but The Game has nothing to do with techniques like that. So the two camps hes artifically trying to divide people into simply doesnt hold water.
 
As far as whether this material can lead to a long-term relationship, the author seems to assume that no one who uses any prepared stories or dresses in a way that attracts attention could possibly be the least bit interesting. Yet again hes dividing people into two groups: interesting vs not interesting. But why assume that guys with good game must score so much lower on the interesting person meter than anyone else in the bar? These seduction community techniques simply provide strategies and techniques to open groups and begin conversations with people in non-threatening ways so that you a least have a chance of connecting with them on a deeper level. There might certainly be more interesting guys at the bar, but if they are just sitting in the corner entertaining their buddies they dont look very interesting compared to the guy with the funny hat doing coin tricks or analyzing your handwriting.
 
The book is full of stories of nice girls being snatched away from their sweet, devoted boyfriends by the counterfeit charm of a pick-up artist.
 
Counterfeit charm? Nice. Are you sure their devoted boyfriends were devoid of all counterfeit charm when they first met, first dated, and first went to bed together? Devoted vs. not devotednice one!
 
a system based upon treating women as objects 
  You treat them like objects, you find techniques that succeed on them as objects, and then you think of them as objects. And who wants a long-term relationship with an object?
 
This idea of treatment women as objects amounts to a dumbbell theory. Dumbell theories are when you take something and divide it into two extremes, like Good vs. Bad, Conscious vs. Unconscious, Left-brain vs. Right-brain, Intellectual vs. Emotional. They provide just enough parts to tell stories of conflicts, but are rares an accurate portrayal of how things really work.
 
People do all sorts of things to attractive attention to themselves and appeal to the opposite sex. Make-up, hair dye, high heels, fashion, tatoos and jewelry to name a few. Behaviorally we tell jokes, we tell stories to make ourselves look noble or wise, we use manners and etiquette to make people feel at easy and to demonstrate good upbringing. How are opening lines and fashion tips from The Game any more deceptive than any other attempts at appealing to others?
 
The Game isnt about treating women as objects. Its not about degrading them, intimidating them, harassing them, or anything like that. Yes, some of the techniques involve teasing, but its harmless stuff like those shoes look comfortable or your teeth remind me of Bugs Bunny nothing malicious or abusive.
 
I think the writer of this article really failed to understand what The Game is all about. There are plenty of guys in the world who are very decent people. They have hobbies, stories, ideas, hopes and dreams, but when it comes to women, they are simply too shy and too unsure of themselves. They lack the confidence required to to face an attractive woman in a public place, surrounded by people who can hear and see your performence and witness painful and embarrassing rejection.
 
The seduction community attempts to arm these guys with a set of theories, ideas and techniques to help them better navigate the dating scene in a way that presents themselves in the best light. And these guys are learning that even if they arent the tallest or the most handsome guy at the bar, even if they arent wearing the most expensive clothes, they still deserve to date an attractive lady as much as the next guy. And some of these techniques, when properly applied, give them the confidence to approach women without looking like a needy dork, and sooner or later these small successes translate into geniune confidence and real social adeptness.
 
Instead, the AI proponents cheer loudly every time someone gets a computer to do something we think of as a human task. Aha! they proclaim. Computers can beat humans at chess. How can we deny them humanity now? But their computers dont play chess at all like humans do.
 
Sorry, but no one doing serious research in AI believes computers play chess exactly as humans do, and I dont believe the seduction community is full of people who believe people are devoid of subjective experience. Discerning readers will find that straw man arguments like these hurt more than help your arguments.
 
posted by Cowboy in Tokyo
 on December 29, 2007 #
 
Aaron, I think youve made an argument against behaviouralism and put it in the shiny clothes of an argument against functionalism.
 
Functionalism allows for internal processes with unbounded complexity, subtlety and variation.  All of your argumentsare based on the simple predictability and manipulability of behaviouralism.
 
posted by Peter Eckersley
 on December 29, 2007 #
 
Top Ten Problems with Cowboys Argument (in order of appearance):
 
The problem is, the girl doesnt think the  guy is interesting. The girl thinks the role the guy is playing is interesting.
 
They are, if they arent original. Pick-up lines are ineffective, mostly because they come off as corny. They sound fake. These are just as fake, they just dont appear to be. Thats deceptive.
 
Thats exactly the authors point. To reverse your question, it may be interesting and effective, but it is honest? What do you value more  effectiveness, or honesty? If youre not being honest, youre being deceptive.
 
Sure it does. There is certainly a qualitative difference between openly devaluing women (e.g. harassment and belittlement)  and viewing women as finite state machines (e.g. run this routine -> get a phone number). But the fact is, neither of these views are of women as individual human beings.
 
The author is not making this assumption. What he is assuming is that guys who are faking good game are less interesting than strong, interesting, and naturally attractive personalities.
 
Which is, in general, a good thing; however, what youre leaving out is the fact that it is done with an ulterior motive  the men the author is talking about dont just want to connect on a deeper level with women. They want to get in their pants. It would be great if PUAs put these skills to use to be more sociable people; unfortunately, it is most often the case that sociability is only directed towards getting girls, rather than being interesting and sociable with people of both genders, in all situations.
 
Admittedly, it is a generalization. The fact remains, it is generally true, although there are nuances that are left out.
 
Because unlike with physical modifications a) a fake personality can be drastically different from a real one, and b) the distance between fake and real personalities can be far greater than between, for example, made-up and natural faces.
 
Again, you make the mistake of equating objectification with malice and abuse.
 
This is the biggest problem with the pick up scene. These men need to learn to share those stories, hopes, and dreams with people in constructive, genuine, and interesting ways, rather than using generalized, impersonal material that isnt necessarily relevant to them as individuals. The pick up scene has a lot to offer, especially in terms of inner game. Where it goes astray is in making it rote and impersonal, rather than true interaction on a deeper level.
 
posted by GBM
 on December 30, 2007 #
 
P.S. Sorry for the annoyance; I didnt realize the numbers wouldnt come through.
 
posted by GBM
 on December 30, 2007 #
 
The problem is, the girl doesnt think the guy is interesting. The girl thinks the role the guy is playing is interesting.
 
Oh dear. We are all but actors and the world is our stage.
 
[The author] assumes captivating openings which makes one stand out from the crowd are deceptive. 
  They are, if they arent original.
 
Consider these openings:
-Can I buy you a drink?
-You have a beautiful smile.
-Do you come here often?
-Hows it going?
 
Are they original? No. Are they deceptive? According to your logic, if they arent original they must be deceptive.
 
Interesting that you feel that way, but I think youre throwing logic and commonsense out the reason to make a petty point.
 
Pick-up lines are ineffective, mostly because they come off as corny. They sound fake. These are just as fake, they just dont appear to be. Thats deceptive.
 
First, The Game doesnt really have pick-up lines. They have Openings. The difference is that once you use a pick-up line, youre on your own. But Game styles openings usually have various branches that you can take, each typically designed to increase your perceived value. But you certainly dont have to stick to someone elses material. You are encourged to create your own. But the Mystery Method and other systems supply theories and guiding principles. Second, the purpose of Openings isnt to instantly woe someone into bed. They are still ways to start conversations with someone in a non-threatening way. They get your door in the door so you can start to build comfort and, if you play your game well, move to the seduction phase. Building comfort is the longest stage of the game, and the most challenging for social robots who just memorize canned stories.
 
Whats especially deceptive about asking two girls if they prefer chocolate or flowers? Or if they think women lie more than men? Or if they think its OK for men to wear pink? How do you suggest we open a conversation? Maybe tell them, Ive never been with a girl and I want you to be my first. That might be honest but is it interesting and effective? 
  Thats exactly the authors point. To reverse your question, it may be interesting and effective, but it is honest? What do you value more  effectiveness, or honesty? If youre not being honest, youre being deceptive.
 
I think youre reading way too much into this. How honest is asking somone: how you doing today? Do you really want to know all the details of their day? Trying to defraud someone out of money is deceptive. Lying to a girl about your committment to her so you can sleep with her is deceptive. Asking her if she thinks its OK for men to wear pink isnt deceptive. Its called making conversation.
 
But not all prepared openings need to be deceptive or especially demeaning to a person. Making lewd statements, belitting someone, using intimidation, sexually harassing someonethose are ways of treating someone like an object, but The Game has nothing to do with techniques like that. So the two camps hes artifically trying to divide people into simply doesnt hold water. 
  Sure it does. There is certainly a qualitative difference between openly devaluing women (e.g. harassment and belittlement) and viewing women as finite state machines (e.g. run this routine -> get a phone number). But the fact is, neither of these views are of women as individual human beings.
 
Think of it as self-marketing. All advertising and marketing is not deceptive. You can make honest, accurate statements about a products features, its effectiveness, and the benefits to the user without being deceptive or dishonest in any way. But are you treating people like objects if you try to anticipate and address their concerns in order to close the sale? Anytime we negotiate with anyone about anything arent we running routines on them? If I tell my boss that I deserve a raise because of x, y and z accomplishments and because Im being paid under market-value etc am I treating him like an finite state machine?
 
So how do you get a girls phone number or score a date with a lady? And what makes your technique so pure and innocent compared to any attempt I might make? I think you arguments amount to little more than a pathetic smear campaign.
 
Why assume that guys with good game must score so much lower on the interesting person meter than anyone else in the bar? 
  The author is not making this assumption. What he is assuming is that guys who are faking good game are less interesting than strong, interesting, and naturally attractive personalities.
 
But guess what, even Naturals can improve their game. Im a natural, and Ive slept with hundreds of ladies well before reading any books like The Game. I just heard about this whole PUA scene from a friend a few months ago, but already Ive make significant improvements to my game. Im dating super model tall Japanese ladies and I only sleep alone when I want to.
 
These seduction community techniques simply provide strategies and techniques to open groups and begin conversations with people in non-threatening ways so that you a least have a chance of connecting with them on a deeper level. 
  Which is, in general, a good thing; however, what youre leaving out is the fact that it is done with an ulterior motive  the men the author is talking about dont just want to connect on a deeper level with women. They want to get in their pants. It would be great if PUAs put these skills to use to be more sociable people; unfortunately, it is most often the case that sociability is only directed towards getting girls, rather than being interesting and sociable with people of both genders, in all situations.
 
OK, I think what you just write is the essence of your true gripe with the game. But you shouldnt assume we all just want to get laid. We might want to find a long-term relationship or just have someone to go for a walk in the park with. Watch the VH1 Pick Up Artist videos online and tell me that you think those guys have sinister motives.
 
But I also think you are holding a common but mistaken view of women. Not all women are pure, honest ideals of commitment and devotion. Some women actually enjoy sex on a non-commitment basisI know plenty of them. Women use men for fancy dinners all the time. And theyd be nice to you one moment, then ditch you as soon as you guy them a round of drinks. And guess what, women cheat too. The researchers in Liverpool found that rates of cases where fathers unknowingly raised another mans child ranged from 1% in some studies to as much as 30%. Women read magazines all the time with tips on appealing to the opposite sex i.e. make-up tips, fashion tips, skin care tips and sex tips. Why give guys such a hard time when we get together and do the same thing? Because assume our motivation are bad and their are good. But I think youre assumptions are unfairly biased.
 
How are opening lines  any more deceptive than any other attempts at appealing to others? 
  Because unlike with physical modifications a) a fake personality can be drastically different from a real one, and b) the distance between fake and real personalities can be far greater than between, for example, made-up and natural faces.
 
haha, fake vs. real personalities. another dumbell theory!
 
the sum total of high heels, eye liner, lipstick, rouge, eye shadow, false eye lashes, fake nails, dyed hair, fake boobs, makes for some pretty drastic changes. Just compare some natural
 
case in point, Courtney Love with and without make-up:
http://img340.imageshack.us/my.php?image=lovemj6.jpg
 
posted by Cowboy in Tokyo
 on December 30, 2007 #
 
FYI: The Game isnt about finding that special person youre compatible with, its about finding a warm wet hole to cum in. Its a step up for men that will fuck mud. Admittedly, a large portion of men seem to be in the fuck mud category.
 
I kind of assume anyone in a bar looking for a woman is uninteresting. Theyd have to dig themselves out of that hole first.
 
Wow, he mentioned you in the article. Neat.
 
Oh my god. Ew. Youre in the mud category, arent you?
 
posted by q
 on December 30, 2007 #
 
Another response to Cowboy:
 
Oh dear. We are all but actors and the world is our stage.
 
Maybe so. But one should still attempt to be as true to ones self as possible.
 
Consider these openings: -Can I buy you a drink? -You have a beautiful smile. -Do you come here often? -Hows it going?
Are they original? No. Are they deceptive? According to your logic, if they arent original they must be deceptive.
 
Sorry, I was unclear. If they are original, they arent deceptive. If they are designed/learned with the specific knowledge that they will make one appear interesting, they are deceptive. On the other hand, the universal opener (Hi!) isnt. deceptive. There is no problem with approaching women and being a genuinely interesting person capable of genuinely interesting, genuine interaction.
 
Game styles openings usually have various branches that you can take, each typically designed to increase your perceived value. 
 
Yes, thats my problem with it. Theyre designed. The user isnt really being himself.
 
The Mystery Method and other systems supply theories and guiding principles. 
 
Which is the authors point. The opening is the first step in the algorithm. Even if the opener, routine, line, kino, whatever is different, there is a specific algorithm. Perhaps youve heard of the DiCarlo Escalation Ladder (http://www.directnaturalgame.com/Techniques/kino-escalation-ladder.html). This is a prime example of an algorithm. Mystery even calls pickup an algorithm in his book The Mystery Method as shown in a quote from Chapter one:
 
In relationships, if someone doesnt have success and wants to get it, he or she will need to adopt the algorithm for success there. I invented that algorithm. I am your teacher and this is your guidebook to discerning the patterns in dynamic social interactions and then using them to your advantage.
 
Cowboy makes an interesting point in saying
 
How honest is asking somone: how you doing today? Do you really want to know all the details of their day?
 
and
 
Asking her if she thinks its OK for men to wear pink isnt deceptive. Its called making conversation.
 
There is a fine line. What decides the issue for me is the intent. And honestly, my biggest problem with the whole thing isnt openers  youre focusing on them, but I can live with a canned line to get a guy going as long as the conversation that follows is genuine.
 
Are you treating people like objects if you try to anticipate and address their concerns in order to close the sale? Anytime we negotiate with anyone about anything arent we running routines on them? If I tell my boss that I deserve a raise because of x, y and z accomplishments and because Im being paid under market-value etc am I treating him like an finite state machine?
 
Another interesting point. With the boss: no.  When asking for a raise, and telling him x y z, you are not presenting a front. You are not engaging in fakery. You are making a real argument. Thats fine. Most sales is like that too. The problem isnt the attractiveness, its the intent and whether the attractiveness is genuine or simply learned/imitated.
 
Even Naturals can improve their game. 
 
Thats beside the point. Anyone can appear to be something they arent. A natural can appear to be an even better natural. The problem is the fakery, not the level at which one starts out. If youre a natural, fine! If you arent, okay! Just dont 1) pretend to be something you arent, or 2) view women as objects.
 
You shouldnt assume we all just want to get laid.
 
Point conceded. Not all of those involved are in it solely for sex. In general, though, their learned social skills are put to use in a gender-specific manner; that is, they use them to dominate other men (AMOGing) and gain status with women.
 
Not all women are pure, honest ideals of commitment and devotion. Some women actually enjoy sex on a non-commitment basisI know plenty of them. 
 
I agree. I only sleep with women on a non-commitment basis.
 
Women use men for fancy dinners all the time. And theyd be nice to you one moment, then ditch you as soon as you guy them a round of drinks. And guess what, women cheat too. 
 
All of which is just as wrong as when men do it.
 
Women read magazines all the time with tips on appealing to the opposite sex i.e. make-up tips, fashion tips, skin care tips and sex tips. 
 
Again, there is a difference between adopting, to some extent, a different personality, and putting on makeup.
 
Why give guys such a hard time when we get together and do the same thing? Because assume our motivation are bad and their are good. 
 
No, I agree that womens motivations may be equally as impersonal. There is a difference between dressing up in a certain way, putting on certain scents, etc. (regardless of gender) and saying or doing a sequence of things designed to, with the knowledge that success is likely, make ones personality appear more attractive. Personality is more fundamental to a person than facial structure, breast size, or skin tone.
 
The sum total of high heels, eye liner, lipstick, rouge, eye shadow, false eye lashes, fake nails, dyed hair, fake boobs, makes for some pretty drastic changes. 
 
Again, personality is more fundamental than physical appearance, but I agree that makeup, etc. can go too far.
 
To be clear: I do not have a problem with most of the inner game stuff offered by the pickup community. Becoming more socially confident is admirable and achievable for most men. Confidence, ability to communicate, and having interesting skills, stories, hopes and dreams are all very good things. But men should become interesting people, develop their own skills, have experiences that translate into interesting stories, and have the guts to dream big on their own.
 
Men should become truly better men.
 
posted by GBM
 on December 30, 2007 #
 
Wow, the lengths to which a PUA will go to justify his art are absolutely astounding.  I cant believe people are still spouting this being a PUA makes you a more interesting person nonsense, especially since Mystery, the godfather of the community, specifically says in his lectures the goal of the Venusian Arts is to walk up to any group and GET THE GIRL TO SLEEP WITH YOU.
 
Arguing morality is pointless.  Instead, Ill just say this: most PUAs pretty much use this stuff to get laid.  I dont really have a problem with this, as most of the art focuses on picking up scenegirls, who are pretty much out there to get laid as well.  However, a great deal of them have the illusion that itll translate into a healthy relationship.  It does for a time, because people who sleep together form very strong emotional attachments.
 
However, relationships formed on a pick-up are shaky - witness Styles latest girlfriend.  He thought he found the one, and he wrote The Game because of it.  Then, a couple years into their relationship, she dumped him because despite his foolproof game, he was still a pretty insecure and boring person.  The mPUA, the master of all master pickup artists, couldnt hold down a girlfriend for more than a couple of years.
 
The only Game worth pursuing is truly eliminating your fear and insecurity, and I cant see any way of doing that other than long sessions in therapy or massive amounts of psychoactive drugs.
 
posted by Curt Hoyt
 on December 30, 2007 #
 
Telling a story is running a routine on someone. Youre trying to get a reaction be it sympathy, or a laugh, or trying to paint yourself as the hero. But you live in a pretty sad world if you ban story telling on the grounds that its non-original (prepared statement!) and designed to make you look more interesting than you really are.
 
There is a fine line. What decides the issue for me is the intent.
 
Yup, I pretty much got that out of what you wrote. I think the crux of our difference hinges on what one defines acceptable and unacceptable intent. If a girl had a fun time with a guy she metbe it in a bar, a park, or on the trainand she felt attracted to him enough and comfortable enough to enjoy sex with him, I dont see any harm, even if that is the only thing he really wanted to do. Its a win-win. :) But I feel your views on sex are probably more Victorian than those widely held here in Japan.
 
Again, there is a difference between adopting, to some extent, a different personality, and putting on makeup.
 
One could argue that the use of make-up, heels and hair-dye is MORE deceptive than using canned material to make conversation. Take the started, Who do you think lies more, women or men? Its pretty transparent they the intent is to start a conversation that generally appeals to womens interests. And as far as whether or not the guy is an original personality or a interesting individual: hes reading books on social dynamics and doing experiments in the field, measuring the results and refining his theories. THAT makes him pretty fucking interesting in my book. Much more than the guys at the bar who spend their hours watch sports, tv sitcoms, or playing X-box.
 
My point is that you keep dividing people up into Fake vs. Real, but I dont believe ANYONE is 100% original in everything they say and do or 100% robotic in their used of scripts and prepared material. Its a bell curve and I think everyone lies somewhere in the middle: we recycle old jokes; drop lines we read in books, heard in movies and on television, and learned from our friends. We incorporate various elements of our heros and idols into our personalitysometimes from real people, sometimes from our heros in the world of fiction.
 
How much of what we say is owned more by tradition, social convention and by the language than some inner creative well-spring? Robin Williams, who I think wed agree is a pretty unique and original personality, is constantly recycling old jokes and doing improv characters like Iron Chef that he invented years and sometimes decades ago.
 
If any of our friends were completely original at every moment it would be freaking scary. Instead our friends role-play with us. We reinforce who they are and what they value in our dealings with them, and they sometimes play along and sometimes breakout of their role in order to challenge the model weve formed of them. If they were completely unpredictable were think they were crazy. Creativity is variations on a theme. There are examples of this all over the place in the world of product design, architecture, in the arts, in the world of fashion, and when that construct we call ones self makes public utterances.
 
Originality is the art of concealing your sourcesh
-Benjamin Franklin
 
Its been fun debating with you. Have a safe and Happy New Year!
 
posted by Cowboy in Tokyo
 on December 31, 2007 #
 
Apropos:

http://www.comics.com/comics/pearls/archive/images/pearls2611170071231.gif
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on December 31, 2007 #
 
Im glad we were able to discuss this. Ive come to a clearer understanding of the specific problems I have with the pickup scene, and I dont think Ive been as clear in expressing these as I could have been.
 
Telling a story is running a routine on someone
 
It can be interpreted that way. My issue is that rAFCs learn to tell stories that are both a) someone elses and b) part of an algorithm, rather than developing their storytelling abilities and engaging in interesting experiences.
 
You live in a pretty sad world if you ban story telling on the grounds that its non-original.
 
True. The issue is whether it is clear that the individual is telling a story. In pickup, its not just entertainment, or trying to communicate a point. Its appearing as something else.
 
If a girl had a fun time with a guy she metbe it in a bar, a park, or on the trainand she felt attracted to him enough and comfortable enough to enjoy sex with him, I dont see any harm, even if that is the only thing he really wanted to do. Its a win-win.
 
I agree, as long as neither partner holds any illusions about the nature and intent of the other. This starts to get at the root of my objection, which Ill discuss at the end.
 
Take the started, Who do you think lies more, women or men? Its pretty transparent they the intent is to start a conversation that generally appeals to womens interests. 
 
Ok, but as I said previously, the opener is what I am least concerned about. The fact that it is an algorithm is what troubles me. You still havent addressed this concern.
 
My point is that you keep dividing people up into Fake vs. Real, but I dont believe ANYONE is 100% original in everything they say and do or 100% robotic in their used of scripts and prepared material. 
 
This is, of course, true. But the majority of PUAs are not being themselves. Style made pickup a lifestyle, devoting all his energies towards that, and he says himself that he became a totally different person.
 
It seems Ive been making several arguments.
 
Originality is not my biggest concern, although it would be nice if men could go out and become more interesting people by doing interesting things, learning interesting skills, and becoming more confident, rather than using canned stuff. The inner game part of pickup is great. Its the fakery that most men use for outer game that isnt. There are exceptions, of course.
 
The problem of the algorithm is twofold. First is that it seems unfair. This isnt an argument worth pursuing. Competition is a natural part of life (and especially mating) and fairness has nothing to do with it.
 
The second problem with algorithm (again, Mystery himself described it this way) is that in guaranteeing a specific result, it encourages men to objectify women. When you press a button on your keyboard, you know what character will appear on the screen. Once interaction with women becomes nothing more than pushing certain buttons, it is nearly impossible to perceive women as individuals.
 
Cowboy pointed out that its a win-win situation if a girl just wants to have a fun time and get laid. This is true, but in most pickup situations, the goals of each partner differ significantly. The PUA just wants to get laid (again, a generalization) and the target may or may not want more. The problem is, the individuals dont actually get to know each other. This comes back to the idea of originality.
 
I think the biggest beef I may have with pickup has nothing to do with women. Pickup encourages men in the idea that getting sex is the definitive measure of success, and the ideal to strive for. Style wrote in The Game that to be really good at pickup, it had to become a lifestyle. The fact is, women can be more than their bodies, and men can be more than their sex drive. Many pickup routines are attractive because they make it appear as though the man understand the woman; that he sees past her attractive body. But this cant be true when the point of pickup is getting laid.
 
Pickup is destructive to women, in that it encourages their objectification. But it is equally destructive of men. The message of pickup is misguided. Even if pickup didnt actively encourage the absurd gender roles we see today; that is, even if it were simply a system to allow men to get sex more often and with more attractive women, it still enables the view of women as objects and men as horn-dogs.
 
The idea of sex as all-important and the measure of a persons quality or success is backwards and harmful. Men should focus on self-improvement and self-investment.
 
Its been good writing these responses, as Ive uncovered nuances in my own beliefs. Thanks for taking the time to discuss the issue.
 
Hope your 2008 is a good one, and happy hunting ;)
 
posted by GBM
 on December 31, 2007 #
 
Mystery, the godfather of the community, specifically says in his lectures the goal of the Venusian Arts is to walk up to any group and GET THE GIRL TO SLEEP WITH YOU.
 
Well turntables were designed to reproduce music, but that hasnt stopped a generation of scratch artists from using them in unintended ways.
 
posted by Cowboy in Tokyo
 on January  1, 2008 #
 
Its funny to reflect on the pickup scripts as simple input-outputs in terms of language reflecting personality triggering a response. In reality, there is a lot more being expressed than simple routines, the intonation, the rise and fall, rhythm of words, excitement, anger, tension. All those things can be evoked with mere grunts and squawks. Words and ideas just add a layer of psychological icing to the cake.
 
There seems to be an assumption made by these wannabe game players that women can be manipulated using the same basic symbolic exchanges, but the reality is that masters of the pickup art would usually have to be lithe and deft gesticulators, using sensory flirting, touch, and smell just as much as language, and using the language to merge the psychological attraction with the sensual.
 
An ugly guy who is a great dancer is far more attractive than a good looking guy who is clumsy and dull. Its obvious to most women that a guy with good rhythm is going to give them a much better fuck. So I think it is a myth that looks dont matter, personality does. Looks are a part of someones personality, they cant be separated. Its just that our societal dogma of what is good looking is actually an imaginary thing, in contrast to the pheremone driven reality of flirting, conversation, power games, and rhythms.
 
I think it makes a huge difference whether you consider human beings to be bags of meat with cocks and pussies, or complex glowing singularities of energy.
 
To look at it from another perspective, it seems to me that it is usually the more artistic and creative people who place a special importance on their personality reflecting a deeper sense of who they really are and projecting that toward others. But if someone doesnt define themselves by that particular emotional need, its not really fair to judge them as being especially fake or deceptive, theyre simply being who they are and doing what they want to do.
 
If an American comic genius satirized the culture/cult of The Game in the same way as Evelyn Waugh did to the Bright Young Things of 1920s British society in Vile Bodies, that would be a book I would love to read. Or maybe the satire is actually The Game itself?
 
posted by maetl
 on January  1, 2008 #
 
guys who are faking good game are less interesting than strong, interesting, and naturally attractive personalities.
 
The Game is two years old, and the main effect of it being released was to spur the PUA community into becoming all about people transforming into genuinely strong, interesting, and naturally attractive personalities.
 
Mystery Method always advocated using canned routines as training wheels to experiment with initially, and then using experiences from your own life and polishing your story telling skills to tell those experiences in an interesting way.
 
In the original article, Aaron mentions the way that Owen Tyler Durden Cook, founder of the RSD companm was portrayed as the antagonist of book to be a nearly sociopathic bad guy; the book was a fictionalisation of real events though, and after its release, Owen refactored his company to be all about being genuinely interesting and attractive.
 
His blog is at http://realsocialdynamics.blogspot.com/ and you might find it interesting.
 
posted by dave
 on January  5, 2008 #
 
Thanks, Aaron, for such a breath of fresh air. Too many of my highly intelligent friends took off their skeptic-hats when presented with Dumbos feather for picking up girls.
 
But isnt there something nice to be said about giving guys the confidence to at least have the opportunity to meet girls?
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on January  6, 2008 #
 
The pick-up methods WORK, feelings are only temporary. Procedures and methods are the only thing that lasts in the long run. If improving ones game is manipulative then so are commercials, makeup, and high heels. It is packaging, but packaging is the attractor, the opportunity door opener, without it the world would be a very unrealistic and boring place. Anyhow its never going to disappear from this world so you might as well accept it, its for your own good.
 
posted by Mike
 on September 24, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 17, 2007
 
Title: No Superpowers
 
Ive been somewhat-obsessively following the recent writers strike in Hollywood. Its got a lot of attraction for me. First, its a big, bold, public labor battle  the kind you dont see much anymore. And second, its filled with people I know. (Yes, Im the dork who actually tries remember the names of the authors of the TV shows I watch.)
 
For those who havent been following, the story is something like this: Amazingly, Hollywood doesnt consist of actors on soundstages simply saying the brilliant lines that come to them in the moment. Instead, people called writers slave away in darkness to craft plots and dialogue which are then turned into scripts for the rest of the people in Hollywood to follow.
 
Despite their importance, writers havent been given much due in Hollywood. They work as employees for studios who pay them money in exchange for the copyrights to their scripts. Meanwhile, the studios then turn the scripts into TV shows and movies that go on to run for years, in reruns and syndication and on home video and DVDs and now on the Internet thru streaming and download.
 
Writers have banded together to form a union, called the Writers Guild of America, to make sure that, just like authors of songs or books, they get paid when the things they write become a success. These payments are called residuals and writers get them when their show reruns or is sold on DVD. The studios have a contract with the guild, and thus with all writers, specifying the minimum amounts they have to pay whenever something like that happens. The guild then audits the studios on behalf of the writers, makes sure they pay their fair share, and then determines which writers deserve the money and mails it out.
 
Studios are still upset about having to pay writers for their work, wishing they could keep all the profits for themselves. Writers are still upset about not having negotiated a better rate for home video residuals. Right now, when you buy a TV show on DVD, the writers get 0.3% of the price  something like six cents, usually. The studios want to pay them the same pitiful amount for online downloads and pay them nothing at all for online streaming. The writers, not surprisingly, would like to get paid a more fair amount.
 
So when the contract between the studios and the guild expired weeks ago, the two sides couldnt agree on a replacement. The studios basically refused to seriously negotiate and that refusal has been going on (in various forms) ever since. So the writers went on strike: theyre no longer allowed to write a single word for a studio until the contract issues get resolved.
 
Instead, writers have been out picketing studio gates, making clever videos online, and trying to bring the studios to the table. As a result, much of television has gone off the air, because there are no new scripts to film. The Daily Show and other nightly comedy shows disappeared immediately, writer-run shows like The Office soon after that, and most of the rest are disappearing as we speak. The studios are continuing to refuse to negotiate.
 
Along the way Ive learned a great deal about the arcanaties of labor law (many of which, like Taft-Hartley, are everyday words in Hollywood), the oddities of Hollywood jargon (the Alphabet=ABC, hyphenates=writer-producers, etc.), and read many gripping stories about what its like to be fighting for your livelihood. (Note to future selves: Dont get in a written debate with people who write for a living.)
 
But perhaps the most touching thing I heard came from J.J. Abrams, the creator of Alias and Lost, and his partner Damon Lindelof. Both are writers and both are bound by the pencils down rule of the strike, even though theyre in the middle of filming the new Star Trek film, presently Paramounts biggest movie. John August describes the scene:
 
Neither J.J. nor Damon are writers on the movie. But they are writers, and WGA members. During a WGA strike, youre not allowed to write on movies or television shows, period. So they cant change a word of the script, nor can anyone else. The script they had at 11:59 p.m. November 5th [when the strike started] is the script they have to shoot.
 
To a screenwriter, that might seem kind of awesome. For once, the director cant change things. But when its your own movie, its maddening. J.J. was describing a scene he was shooting the day before. Midway through it, he got a great idea for a new line. Which he couldnt write. Couldnt shoot. Couldnt be in his movie.
 
Damon described it like having one of your superpowers taken away.
 
I am not the director of a big Hollywood movie, nor am I striking for my livelihood, or even doing much of anything, but I have to admit, thats how Ive been feeling lately. Now that Im getting over being very sick, I find that I dont feel terribly bad anymore, I just feel kind of tired. All the time.
 
So I go to finish up a new piece of software Ive been working on (Ive got dozens, just sitting here, waiting for the finishing touches), and I just cant. I cant type. I feel like someone whos used to having lightning bolts fly out of their hands but now all I get are little sparks. Ssszzt. Szzzt. Bzzt. Ive got nothing.
 
And so Im stuck here in my room, lots of stuff I want to do, but nothing comes out. Its like having your superpowers taken away. Damon, I really know what you mean.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 17, 2007
 
:-(
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December 19, 2007 #
 
You have my empathy. My wrists are playing up. For someone who lives online this is a BAD THING.
 
posted by David Gerard
 on December 20, 2007 #
 
Hi Aaron!
 
I feel sorry for you and would like to help you.
 
The worst problem with being stuck is, that one tends to ask why-questions not to answer and cant go on with how for several reasons, like: nothing comes out. One knows how would be better, but one has the feeling to have the right to ask for the unanswerable why and feel solutionless,empty.
 
This situation is dangerous..storytelling might help.
Just to tell you, storytelling, like you did with bubble-city, started at the wrong time in personal situations, can even increase the situation. You might get the feeling, that even your imagination feels empty.
 
I still think, that a fascinating project, quickly realizeable and with the right team highly sucessful but related to deeper aspects, would be the right thing for you.
Dont get me wrong, I apply my projections on purpose.
 
I shared your experiences, in different times, I was a super-brain once, I had my burn-outs, I could overcome them, sometimes with very freaky methods, but I was aware of them, that was, why I recommended you an adventure.
 
Whatever you might think of me, it is porobably wrong - I like playing but tell the truth though, so that you met Lilo was probably not the easiest way to tell you about my projectbut it clarified the childs view I kept.
I believe in narratic approaches and I am sure this will soon be widely accepted, it is a logical consequence for several reasons not to be enrolled herewell, I play this a little freaky, I want it like this. (Basta ;-))
I still think you and your team should program my tool, detest running after you, but will have to say yes or no soon to a proposal by some entrepreneurs with several million dollar seed-capital, who will buy the center of a realizeable elaborated idea, only the center, while the rest id even more valuable, but I would stand alone with this then, somehow, this depends on the contract I can reach.
But I will get very little,compared to the value, quite a lot, maybe though,  while this project could be programmed by your team within little time - and be foundation for all kind of related augmented (my use of the term augmented is different from the augmented reality term!) improvement tools and solutions. 
The separatly realizeable part of the idea is, from the meta-view, an aid-project-creation-mashine, an addition that will converge fluently, started here in Austria together with an university I will name in my email. I changed the partnership, the recent is a lot more important internationally.
 
Can I trust you and expect an answer, if I send you as much of my serious project, as I have available in English,mostly explanations of the background - starting with a story though?
My project is truly related to Open Library, Real-utopias, developed years before I knew your interstes and projects or even know about you and includes a lot more of things which complement one another. But still the center, the tool is simple, really great and somewhat endlessly to elaborate, always producing valuable contents. And to be published separated from all freaky aspects!!!!
Infogami is so close to my concept too, I just have an all-in-one-solution, of which these approaches are a logical part.
I started with several partners, but left the cooperations because they misunderstood the simplest basics, this is not my fault, it is Austria, the recent proposal is by an American start-up, it lacks a lot of possible outcomes again, but I am close to give up, earn a little and go for the rest separated.
I am not out formoney, I could have realized everything long ago if so, this possible outcome makes me sad and depressive too, but I have donated enough of my life-time for my idealism, and I would not give up over all, just the best strategy.
I get money for the programming here, independently from the mentioned offer, I had to work hard for this - so I could even pay you for it, I am conviced you and your team would be the better ones to do it, better, than my Austrian contacts, better, than the Americans.
I can pay for the programming, but would prefer to partner, as the related concepts could be enroled easily and most important: together then, you are out for the same, unless your public image is wrong.
 
It is the best solution for a life-inventory, self-improvement tool and a lot more, to be created individually game-based by the users.
 
I know it seems crazy to contact you this way, but what should I do? If I know you are the right ones, I try to go for it, I have other solutions, but this would be the best.
I am convinced you will be interested and feel sorry, that I approached you with the freaky part, instead of the serious, I thought you would take it in a good way.
What I play with Lilo is similar to your augmented approach, like blocking your blogbut I have no technical knowledge - and a differnt story, focussed on the same topics, meant to start at a later point, this blog is just half-private preparation, the university accepted it.
This offline-girl approach did not prevent me from creating a demo-version for a technical tool that will turn facebook into one nice feature within an easily individually organizeable personal knowledge organisation structure.
 
Please delete this post when you read it, it is, like some of the others, not meant for public, but I do not really care what others think, so I just posted them, this one is too private.
 
I am ten years older than you are, so you have really not to be afraid I would have any personal interests in you, besides sharing minds and creativity and find a team that can understand what I am out for and work in a think-tank one day, with the right ones, maybe you too.
 
Take Care
Lilo
 
PS: something else: I never copy anyone, I am very puzzled or bewildered about what I call coincidences myself.
 
posted by Lilo
 on December 20, 2007 #
 
Hi Aaron!
 
I feel sorry for you and would like to help you.
 
The worst problem with being stuck is, that one tends to ask why-questions not to answer and cant go on with how for several reasons, like: nothing comes out. One knows how would be better, but one has the feeling to have the right to ask for the unanswerable why and feel solutionless,empty.
 
This situation is dangerous..storytelling might help.
Just to tell you, storytelling, like you did with bubble-city, started at the wrong time in personal situations, can even increase the situation. You might get the feeling, that even your imagination feels empty.
 
I still think, that a fascinating project, quickly realizeable and with the right team highly sucessful but related to deeper aspects, would be the right thing for you.
Dont get me wrong, I apply my projections on purpose.
 
I shared your experiences, in different times, I was a super-brain once, I had my burn-outs, I could overcome them, sometimes with very freaky methods, but I was aware of them, that was, why I recommended you an adventure.
 
Whatever you might think of me, it is porobably wrong - I like playing but tell the truth though, so that you met Lilo was probably not the easiest way to tell you about my projectbut it clarified the childs view I kept.
I believe in narratic approaches and I am sure this will soon be widely accepted, it is a logical consequence for several reasons not to be enrolled herewell, I play this a little freaky, I want it like this. (Basta ;-))
I still think you and your team should program my tool, detest running after you, but will have to say yes or no soon to a proposal by some entrepreneurs with several million dollar seed-capital, who will buy the center of a realizeable elaborated idea, only the center, while the rest id even more valuable, but I would stand alone with this then, somehow, this depends on the contract I can reach.
But I will get very little,compared to the value, quite a lot, maybe though,  while this project could be programmed by your team within little time - and be foundation for all kind of related augmented (my use of the term augmented is different from the augmented reality term!) improvement tools and solutions. 
The separatly realizeable part of the idea is, from the meta-view, an aid-project-creation-mashine, an addition that will converge fluently, started here in Austria together with an university I will name in my email. I changed the partnership, the recent is a lot more important internationally.
 
Can I trust you and expect an answer, if I send you as much of my serious project, as I have available in English,mostly explanations of the background - starting with a story though?
My project is truly related to Open Library, Real-utopias, developed years before I knew your interstes and projects or even know about you and includes a lot more of things which complement one another. But still the center, the tool is simple, really great and somewhat endlessly to elaborate, always producing valuable contents. And to be published separated from all freaky aspects!!!!
Infogami is so close to my concept too, I just have an all-in-one-solution, of which these approaches are a logical part.
I started with several partners, but left the cooperations because they misunderstood the simplest basics, this is not my fault, it is Austria, the recent proposal is by an American start-up, it lacks a lot of possible outcomes again, but I am close to give up, earn a little and go for the rest separated.
I am not out formoney, I could have realized everything long ago if so, this possible outcome makes me sad and depressive too, but I have donated enough of my life-time for my idealism, and I would not give up over all, just the best strategy.
I get money for the programming here, independently from the mentioned offer, I had to work hard for this - so I could even pay you for it, I am conviced you and your team would be the better ones to do it, better, than my Austrian contacts, better, than the Americans.
I can pay for the programming, but would prefer to partner, as the related concepts could be enroled easily and most important: together then, you are out for the same, unless your public image is wrong.
 
It is the best solution for a life-inventory, self-improvement tool and a lot more, to be created individually game-based by the users.
 
I know it seems crazy to contact you this way, but what should I do? If I know you are the right ones, I try to go for it, I have other solutions, but this would be the best.
I am convinced you will be interested and feel sorry, that I approached you with the freaky part, instead of the serious, I thought you would take it in a good way.
What I play with Lilo is similar to your augmented approach, like blocking your blogbut I have no technical knowledge - and a differnt story, focussed on the same topics, meant to start at a later point, this blog is just half-private preparation, the university accepted it.
This offline-girl approach did not prevent me from creating a demo-version for a technical tool that will turn facebook into one nice feature within an easily individually organizeable personal knowledge organisation structure.
 
Please delete this post when you read it, it is, like some of the others, not meant for public, but I do not really care what others think, so I just posted them, this one is too private.
 
I am ten years older than you are, so you have really not to be afraid I would have any personal interests in you, besides sharing minds and creativity and find a team that can understand what I am out for and work in a think-tank one day, with the right ones, maybe you too.
 
Take Care
Lilo
 
PS: something else: I never copy anyone, I am very puzzled or bewildered about what I call coincidences myself.
 
posted by Lilo
 on December 20, 2007 #
 
Hi Aaron,
 
very nice metaphor, I feel very much the same (including the bunch of unfinished projects, and often feeling sick). I recently asked for help on news.yc, some answers were interesting, I think: http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=89861
At least in my case, there is definitely a mixture of several of the things people mentioned: too many projects, not knowing which one I am in love with, unresolved issues in social life and surroundings, reluctance to adopt other peoples coding styles.
As I mention there, the only thing that worked for me recently was to learn a new programming language doing project euler problems. Useless, but at least I could prove to myself that I have not become completely stupid yet. 
Anyway, I enjoy your writings. Since not many other people were commenting, I decided to do it, even though I dont really have a helpful advice.
 
posted by Bjrn
 on December 22, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 14, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 11
 
Jason was a man on the run: Google, with their paws in every phone and PC from here to China, was looking for him. Visiting his friends was out of the question; Google surely had all of them under surveillance. And calling or emailing them was dangerous too. You never knew when they had a Google-powered phone or forwarded their email to a Gmail account (which lots of people did now just for spam filtering). But what if he didnt share anything private? He could at least send a message through Tor telling his friends what had happened.
 
The library was closing soon, so he hurriedly composed an email for Sarah:
 
Dear Sarah,
 
I know what Im going to say will make you think Ive gone even farther off the deep-end than I already have, but its my best shot. I found a backdoor in a popular algorithm and now Google is out to get me. I have to hide out for the moment, but so far Im OK. Please make sure my friends and folks at the office dont get too worried about me.
 
I cant check my email without giving myself away, so if you want to write back, purchase a classified ad in the New York Times  use the word Sarton.
 
Missing you,
 
Jason
 
There, that ought to be at least a start. This way at least Sarah would know what was up and hed have a safe channel for hearing back from Sarah. Never any harm in having another channel for information, right?
 
Jason bought himself a pillow and spent the night sleeping with some homeless people in a little cranny near the library that they claimed each night. They had turned the unused nook into their own little community, gabbing and singing and dancing until late, before curling up in a dark place in a sleeping bag that looked like it had been left out for several decades and turning in for the night. One by one, each of them disappeared to curl up and Jason joined them. By the time the sun and streetsweepers and cars awoke him the next morning, they were all gone, as if their little homeless community had never happened in the first place.
 
Jason looked out over the world just waking up  cars driving to work before the rush hour traffic hit, a couple people scurrying by, shops getting ready to open their doors  and felt like the world was full of possibility. He stretched out and began walking into its gloriously bright morning before he realized it wasnt.
 
Trent knew that staying on top of the business world meant staying on top of what was happening. So he grabbed an intern and headed to The Butler and the Chef, a South Park restaurant for one of his espionage breakfasts. Corporate executives from all over town came here to have lunch and do deals and Trent made sure he stayed on top of what they were doing by taking regular chances to come here and eavesdrop on their conversations.
 
Of course, he knew that others were eavesdropping on his own, which is why he brought along the intern: disinformation. So, uh, what secret projects are you working on, Trent? said the intern in a stage voice. Im glad you asked, Trent replied. Things at Newsflip have never been more exciting. In fact, dont tell anyone this, but were in the middle of acquisition talks.
 
Really? the intern said, looking a bit worried. I hadnt heard that  with who? With whom, Trent corrected. With whom? Well, Im not at liberty to say. But lets just say it rhymes with boo-gull. Wow, said the intern, genuinely worried now. For how much? Oh come on, Trent said laughing, you know I cant disclose that. Oh, but just a hint? Well, if you insist Its somewhere between $200 million and $201 million. A-ha-ha-ha. The intern, knowing his options wouldnt vest unless he managed to keep his job for another six months, looked down at his soup.
 
Wayne was having trouble sleeping. He showed up at his office looking even more disheveled than usual. Even his assistant, who had taken to spending the days chatting with friends on the phone and watching YouTube videos, noticed something was up. Something wrong, sir? she asked. Wayne mumbled and shuffled into his office.
 
It was this damn issue of the kid. Wayne knew, rationally, that it was all for the best, but in his heart it just felt wrong to him. He felt like he ought to use his influence to do something. But what could he do? Why, hed talk about it on his show, of course  Google money be damned. He set up the video camera and began thinking about what he was going to say.
 
I know Ive been a supporter of Google in the past, hed started. But I think theyve finally crossed the line.
 
He looked at himself in the video preview. His shirt was askew and his hair in wild clumps standing up from his head. Everything looked badly wrinkled.
 
Ive recently received information that they are chasing and persecuting a young kid just beca
 
He looked into his own eyes on the monitor. And then he shut off the camera. Nobody would believe him. He didnt have any evidence. And he certainly didnt look credible. And then what? Google would go after him  not only take away the nice office and the pretty assistant, but drag his name through the mud. And God knows what theyd do to his search results. Wayne shuddered to think of it.
 
No, he needed to work this from the inside. Get more information at the very least. He put in a call to Samuel.
 
Sarah read over the email. Then she paused and read it again. And then she freaked out.
 
Hey, Samuel, Wayne said. Wayne, good to hear from you, whats up? Oh, I was just calling to talk about asking if I could come see some Google people I wanted to talk to. Umm, Samuel said. What do you mean? Well, you know that story you were telling me the other night, you know the story about the kid? I dont know what youre talking about, Wayne. Come on, the other night, at the bar, when you were telling me about the kid you wanted to take o Wayne, dont be silly  I was just kidding around about that stuff. Samuel laughed. Heh, you took me seriously? Come on. You really think a company like this would do stuff like that. Give me a break! Anyway, if you want the real story you should just come by the offices sometime. Oh. Uh, okay. How about today? Oh, well, umm, I guess that works. What time? Lets say around 3? Sure, come on by. Great, see you then. Great, bye. Bye.
 
Jason was upset. He was letting his emotional mind get the best of him  hanging out with homeless people on the street and at the library, writing letters to Sarah. He needed to think rationally. He needed coffee.
 
He spent some of his little remaining cash on a large cup of coffee and stole a newspaper from behind a register so he could diagram his situation on it.
 
Heres how it is: Google was using NNA to control the news. Hed found out about this. Google had found out about him. Google didnt want people to know, so they were trying to stop him. He was trying to stop Google.
 
The solution was obvious: he just needed to use the backdoor to tell everyone about what hed discovered and how Google had been chasing him. Proving it would be hard but the fact that he could control the news to force his story to the top would probably be proof enough. Google would try to shut things down, of course, but that would only draw more attention. Theres nothing Internet geeks hate more than having stuff shut down.
 
So he just needed to use Tor to launch another exploit on the backdoor. Itd probably require a few tries to get right and hed have to be very careful about covering his tracks and moving around, but it seemed doable.
 
He was just about to fold up the newspaper when he spotted the classifieds. He figured he might as well check for a note from Sarah. He scrolled thru them, looking for the word Sarton. Then he found it:
 
Dear Sarton, use your powers and say goodbye to the girl. Love, G.
 
Shit, he thought.
 
Back at the office, Trent ran down his list of priorities. Being the boss meant there was just too much to do and far too little time to do it, so Trent had developed a system. Actually, he hadnt really developed a system, hed bought one that had come highly recommended. And he didnt practice it so much as give it to his assistant and order her to do it.
 
Shed come back and insisted that she couldnt actually do it all by herself, that there were things like RAM dumps and reviews that only he could really practice. Oh, alright, he said, Ill do the reviews. How do I do that? And shed explained that once a week he needed to blah blah blah, anyway, he just knew it was important to go over his priorities and see how well he was doing at all of them.
 
Spreadsheets  hed gotten those all off. Boost morale  his meetings had almost certainly done that. Welcome new guy  oh yeah, where was the new guy. He recalled him sitting over hmm, his seat was empty. He headed over, deciding to take a hands-on approach. Hey, anyone seen the new guy? Nah, hes been working odd hours the past few days. Hmm, well I guess I did say he could work from home. Hey, whats that your working on? Oh, uh, nothing. No, come on, bring that window back, I want to see it. Umm, uh, yeah, here it is. Wow, this looks great  I just have a few comments. This whole sidebar needs to be purple and instead of a list of news stories this should show the blog posts with the number of comments. And each one should have a little picture  pictures are key; they draw attention. Um, right  yeah, I guess so. Glad were on the same page  Ill see you later.
 
Trent headed back to his desk and called over his assistant. Sandy, he said. Tell Jane to meet me in my meditation chamber. Yes, sir, she said, and Trent watched as she rushed back towards her desk. He grabbed the bag under his desk and headed to the meditation chamber. God, he loved running a company.
 
Wayne got in his car and headed down the long Bay Area highways toward Mountain View. He passed offices and billboards, trees and curving streets, HOV lanes and overpasses. But eventually he ended up in what could have been its own small city, a maze of office buildings and little poorly-signed streets. At the center of it all was the famed Building 42 complex, with its volleyball courts and dinosaur skeletons and huge cafeterias, and sexy colorful architecture. But radiating out from that were increasingly drab gray buildings separated by large streets and parking lots where they kept all the real employees, the people who stayed up into 3 in the morning to make sure that the Java code that drew the sidebars of help pages worked properly.
 
As Google had built more and more projects, they needed an increasing number of these grunt-work programmers. They had started interviewing just about everyone CS graduate, in the hopes of filtering out the good ones and luring them here to their artificial wonderland in Mountain View.
 
Wayne headed for the lobby.
 
Next year: Chapter 12
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 14, 2007
 
Back by popular acclaim! At long last: the return of Bubble City.
 
I had figured that Id just give up on this since I didnt finish it before the deadline, but since I got sick and since a lot of people seem to actually be reading and enjoying it, I decided I would continue. Im still not feeling very well, so dont expect daily updates, but I will at least try to finish it in the next couple months.
 
Expect less plot and more description and didacticism, since thats the only way to get the word count up.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 14, 2007 #
 
Bubble city sucks a huge dick.
 
posted by jonx
 on December 15, 2007 #
 
Yeah, thats my opinion too.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 15, 2007 #
 
now you HAVE to finish the story
 
posted by ted dansen
 on December 15, 2007 #
 
Hi Aaron  great story! Please dont let this project deteriorate!
 
posted by ALaughRamp
 on December 15, 2007 #
 
Please finish, and dont worry about Novel writing month. And get well soon!
 
posted by Bjoern
 on December 15, 2007 #
 
Hey, get well soon, and keep going..
 
posted by Pratik
 on December 15, 2007 #
 
Dear Sarton,
Thanks, and please continue
 
posted by G
 on December 15, 2007 #
 
Yeah, thats my opinion too.
 
dont listen to the internet, the internet is not your friend. the internet says it loves you, but in reality, it just wants to perform anal sex on you.
 
posted by q
 on December 15, 2007 #
 
Welcome back!
 
Didacticism: good. Focusing on the word count now that the deadlines gone: bad.
 
Do you think you could integrate Knols to the story? http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knol
 
posted by Tommi
 on December 16, 2007 #
 
Im so glad youve found your voice and that it is so compelling. If this is the product of your sickness then I hope you avoid getting well!
 
Youre fulfilling the promise you showed over the last decade - what a treat!
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on December 17, 2007 #
 
Dont listen to spamming idiots Bubble City is well written and enjoyable
 
posted by 
 on January 13, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 10, 2007
 
Title: Judgment Day
 
People dont like being told that theyre bad. And they especially dont like it if its going to cost them a lot to be good. Finding other ways out is preferable, even if it requires some violence to the truth. Today we look at some ways people try to evade responsibility.
 
[Please read the previous post before continuing.]
 
A large number of people insist that things arent proven or aid doesnt work. In his 1996 book Living High and Letting Die Peter Unger reports a study where he found that, including in administrative expenses and other overhead, $200 could feed a malnourished child through the highest-risk childhood years. UNICEF just recently released a new report finding that, for the first time, the number of children dying before 5 has fallen, thanks to their intervention. And Oxfam, to take just one example, through its development projects in Cambodia has helped over 35,000 people come to support themselves. Doctors Without Borders reports that they treated 10 million people last year, treating 26,000 people from cholera, for example, and treating 63,000 children for malnutrition. Even the most vocal critics of aid, like William Easterly, who has written many books and op-eds attacking government aid programs as unhelpful, has to concede that private projects like Oxfam and UNICEF are successful and positive. Nobody, of course, provides any real argument against these things. They just say its too unclear.
 
If thats the real issue, then donate to an organization like Poverty Action Lab at MIT. PAL does controlled randomized trials of the success of aid interventions. Your money wont go directly to help people, but it will help to test other peoples aid interventions and improve their effectiveness. A recent report [PDF] finds that mass deworming programs dropped infections by 23 points and increased school participation by 25% (thanks, in part, to spillover effects), apparently caused children to grow taller and healthier, and cost only $5 for each disability-adjusted year of life saved.
 
Barry Kelly insists that he has no duty to help others and thus is not culpable for their suffering. Of course, this is an irrelevance. Nobody is trying to put him on trial  just arguing he should do more to help.
 
But Barry goes one step further: he says that he should not help because giving his money to starving people would lead to lack of incentive to compete, lack of investment base for risky & experimental ventures, and congealing layers of bureaucracy feeding on income redistribution. Taking this at face value for a moment, it is not clear to me why why saving people from starvation would cause the first two  wouldnt there be a huge incentive to compete for saving lives and trying new experimental techniques in doing so? Perhaps Barry means that the first-world might have less competition in a field like, say, luxury watches. I dont see this as a tragedy. It amazes me that someone would admit that they prefer to have millions of people starve to death than to have a complicated bureaucracy.
 
In response, Barry explains that there needs to be a cost-benefit analysis. He does not explain what he wants to analyze. Should we make a little chart with the benefits of competition in the luxury watch market on one side and the benefits of saving people from starvation on the other?
 
He also argues that we should do nothing about starvation because many people die in car accidents. I am not sure how this is relevant, but I deplore the deaths of people in car accidents and personally do not drive because of it.
 
Sohail provides the amazing argument that one shouldnt donate to UNICEF because They have a business model that revolves around needy people. To keep the model going, you need needy people. It is not clear how this principle is supposed to work. Are the people at UNICEF supposed to be quietly sabotaging their efforts in order to preserve their jobs? Since non-profit employees generally take large salary cuts and do unusually-onerous work, this seems wildly unlikely. If they wanted a safe job they would surely join the for-profit sector. Sohail provides no evidence for this amazing claim.
 
MC argues that people will starve since he no longer purchases their products. But certainly fewer people will starve if he spends his money directly on keeping people from starving as opposed to having people not starve incidentally because he is purchasing TVs from them. Is he claiming that the people not starving right now somehow have a special right not to starve? Its hard to see why that would be the case.
 
That Hypothetical says that Development economics is a complex subject. Im not sure how this is relevant. Perhaps in the ancient society the King has a lot of scholars working for him making the issue of how to decide which person to choose into some complex subject. That doesnt change the moral issues.
 
Mike Bruce says that if we all spent our disposable income on helping starving people, we might face economic collapse. This seems absurd but also certainly isnt a question anyone is facing. Even if all the readers of this blog spent all their disposable income on preventing starvation, that would be inconsequential in economic terms.
 
There are actual arguments against the issues raised in the last post. These are not them.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 10, 2007
 
There are actual arguments against the issues raised in the last post. These are not them.
 
I notice that you didnt answer mine.
 
This whole argument of yours is the aid equivalent of the ticking time bomb in manhattan argument for torture: you imagine a simplified situation and draw moral conclusions from it which are simply not valid in the real world. I think you can do better.
 
A better way to think about aid (as so many things) is to think at the margin: what variables change which way if you supply a little more food? Very likely population changes upwards. This is bad. Certainly incentives for the locals who grow food, or warehouse it to profit from lean times, change downwards. This is not a silly thing to worry about.
 
Things which promote lower fertility, like literacy, and supplies of condoms, and factory jobs for women, seem much less fraught with possible negative consequences. But youre completely unable to analyse them if you simply count up deaths on your fingers.
 
Funding the Poverty Action Lab is a good suggestion, too. If youre a US or EU citizen, perhaps the best thing you can do is anything towards reducing the agricultural subsidies. Buying food from these places instead of shipping it to them would be a good idea.
 
posted by improbable
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
I agree with improbable.
 
posted by Q
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
Ha! Its interesting how you continue to argue emotionally. Such argument is still absolutist, because it has no end, there will never be enough. In much the same way that politicians ratchet up surveillance and control centralization measures (as opposed to security measures) and justify it with fear-oriented platitudes like keep out the bad people and think of the children, you attack my general statements on the broad problem of aid and poverty in Africa, and the rejection of the idea that we should donate all our non-essential income to other people in particular, with the emotive image of starving people. You used the words starving, starve, starvation no less than 13 times in your post above.
 
I believe it to be pretty well known that reason is the wrong tool to argue against emotion, just like emotion is the wrong tool against reason. I also believe that money invested in the lives of other people needs to be spent with care - implying reason. You point out some excellent uses of money at the start of your article - aid I certainly dont object to, and aid that doesnt involve all non-essential income - and its clear that reason and cost&benefit is being applied, in those cases. We have to do so, since we dont have infinite money. And besides, if we gave all our non-essential income, we would have nothing spare with which to form the fabric of Western society, including its economic surpluses and medical advancements. When you mock my suggestion that cost/benefit analysis needs to be applied, to invoke that faculty of reason, I think you reject reason as a guide to your action.
 
And I think thats the worst thing about your line of argument.
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
I dont think Im rejecting reason  Im addressing these (somewhat) reasoned arguments in a reasoned way. Starving isnt an emotional word, its the best descriptor I have for the class under discussion. Sometimes you have to use emotionally-laden stories to make moral arguments and the last piece definitely was making moral arguments, but this is to aid reason. Emotion is not the opposite of reason but can often be an aid to thinking rationally.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
BTW, I find this profile (pdf) from The New Yorker  author: Ian Parker  of (in)famous philantropist Zell Kravinsky absolutely fascinating.
 
posted by FrF
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
A better response to objections about one type of helping is to suggest another way to help. I think Engaging in a debate like this was a mistake. I hope the way youve framed objections to direct aid isnt keeping you from exploring real issues and also real solutions to those issues, as its already hindered discussion of those issues.
 
You say the complexity of development economics doesnt change the moral issues, but thats only true if your moral issues are a simplistic good vs. bad. Obviously direct aid is better than nothing, but we have more than those two choices available, and in many cases direct aid is clearly not the best solution. Our alternatives to direct aid include projects like the Grameen Bank. How does that compare to direct aid? Rather than arguing about help vs. not help, we should be dimiss not help as unworthy of discussion and look at the pros and cons of various ways of helping.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
@FrF You beat me too it. This post made me think of that profile of Kravinsky. Definitely thought provoking, especially around his belief that his children were no more special than anyone elses. On one hand a logical assertion, but goes against a strongly felt emotion of protecting ones children above others.
 
posted by elm
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
I like that their is a debate about aid to Africa. Wether its good or not should be talked about. What I find lacking in this debate is not great arguments for or against, but the African voice. Either they dont talk about AID, or we dont listen. I think any disscussion about aid has to include the people we are trying to aid.
 
On another note, I believe that our aid for food, and medicine is useful for now in a crisis state, but if want a sustainable system of help then we need to concentrate our help into education, and ideas, otherwise no one will be able to be an African doctor or and African farmer.
 
Catch a fish for a man, feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish and feed him for a lifetime.
 
posted by Alex
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
As the holidays approach and every chartiy sends out solitications, Im curious what organizations you like enough to support with all that Reddit money?
 
posted by Tom S.
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
I agree with Scott that suggesting better ways of helping is a good idea. (Although in one comment you cant see the whole person, of course.)
 
But I diagree that Obviously direct aid is better than nothing, this is not obvious to me. Contact with the modern world has brought a lot of poverty to societies which were not so very poor when isolated from us. Malawi is an example where this seems to have happened (as far as I can tell) mostly through positive actions, like medicine and food aid, not negative ones (like AK-47s).
 
There are lots of good ideas out there. For disaster relief, this scheme in Malawi which sets up ATMs to distribute dollars not grain sounds wonderful to me. The little guy with one truck will buy another to ship food from the coast. And hell still be doing business after the white 4x4s have gone home.
 
For general development, well its all the things I said above: lets buy things from them. TV sets if they make those. Fresh fruit if they dont. Coffee. Go and travel and spend money in local establishments. Sponsor literacy projects. These things seem certain to be net positives.
 
And also, you can almost certainly earn money faster than you can beg it from your friends. So spend your own money, and spend your effort worrying about where its going. Bill Gates deserves infinitely more respect than Bob Geldof.
 
posted by improbable
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
IF you go to Africa, you can find lots of clothes for sale- clothes that were sent as aid to the country.  However, if you want a suit, you have to import one at great expense.  There used to be a thriving industry of tailors in africa and good suits could be had at reasonable cost but the influx of donated clothes drove them out of business.
 
Charity does not work economically, and from the statemetns you made int his post it is clear that you do not understand economics.  Almost all fo the social responsibility efforts in the world are run by people who do not understand economics and they end up subisdizing and creating more of what they are trying to prevent.
 
Sending a town food and sending them teachers of agriculture are totally different things - the former creates starvation and the latter ends starvation. Literally, somalis were driven off of productive lands and herded into camps and starved so that Said Barre could get more money.
 
Sending aid money and giving microloans have opposite effects- the former creates poverty and the latter ends it. One african nation went from a land that couldnt feed its population to one that exported corn to all of its neighbors simply by ignoring the world monetary funds insistence that it not use fertilizer in its agriculture.
 
The only solution to help people- the only one that works, and the only one that is sustainable is free market capitalism.
 
If you want to help africance, fund microloans or  otherwise work to overthrow the governments that are the source of the problem.
 
Dont call on our government to prop up dictators abroad who starve people as most of the help africa plans do.
 
posted by Joe
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
Aaron: I enjoyed reading your posts because they reminded me of a more innocent time (aka the 90s), when I was young and still believed in all that goodness. Then I went and studied Economics.
 
Just a few Q&As that maybe, maybe will help clarify Barrys point(s) - some of which I agree with. I am not going to cover every aspect of this (e.g. the psychological effects of aid or how aid facilitates dictatorship), but stick to what I believe are the basics, the core arguments, and they just happen to be related to Economics.
 
I dont really know, nor do I think anybody does because this question is related to a whole lot of complex issues.
 
However, starvation seems to be correlated with low per capita income, low levels of education, lack of adequate health care and non-democratic government (debatable, I know).
 
All these are structural, macro factors.
 
The recipient: Experiences a loosening of her budget constraint (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Budget_constraint), an increase in income. At the same time, her level of productivity (labour output) remains the same. (This is called a ceteris paribus condition, it is a tool for analysis and has nothing to do with the fact that higher income can lead to improved health or more time available for productive undertakings.) One could also say that now the person receives more money for the same amount of output or productivity, or: their wage has risen. I know this argument sounds a bit dodgy when one is talking about the absolute poor, however, the principle can still be applied. A higher wage implies that in order to entice the person to sell even more of their productivity on the market, the  wage rate paid for that additional productivity needs to be higher again. Therefore, aid may increase the so-called reservation wage. In conclusion, the recipient of free income (=aid) may be less likely to seek out other sources of income than they would be without that aid, therefore decreasing the potential for economic activity. This is not to say that aid makes people lazy, especially when were talking rock bottom poor. But think about it.
 
The sender: Experiences a tightening of the budget constraint, resulting in lower purchasing power. I think it is prudent to take a little detour at this point and look at how wealth is created in a modern economy. The simple fact is: Production of the bare necessities is too efficient at this point to keep all of us employed and happy. Thats why developed economies move towards services and high tech. So Imagine there are two people in your economy. One produces food, the other, say, computers. Both of them make more than they need to purchase their food requirement and have plenty left over to buy computers. Now imagine (and I know you can tell where this is going) both of them stop buying computers and instead send all that extra to starving people. There would be no demand for computers, computer guy would be out of work, food guy would have to feed him (taxes!), and neither of them would have anything left to send to their starving fellow humans. The standard of living in industrializes, developed nations has increased because we are able to produce and consume more than the absolute basics.
 
There is more: Assume humans are fundamentally greedy. Maybe to different degrees, but lets face it, one of the best motivators is a prospective gain for ourselves. If we expected to give all our money away, maybe, just maybe, we wouldnt work those 70 hour weeks. Think about it.
 
> Giving aid to individuals does not tackle the problem at its root (i.e. the macro environment).
 
> The type of aid suggested in the previous article would have detrimental effects on productivity in both the recipients and senders economy.
 
And this is where cost-benefit analysis comes in. One may think that a human life is invaluable. However, to come back to the traffic example, we know that streetlights prevent deaths and still would refuse to invest 100% of GDP in streetlights. Wouldnt really be all that practical anyway. There is a vast literature out there on the valuation of human life; this is applied in health care (e.g. NHS is willing to pay up to 30k for one more of full quality life) and transport decisions.
 
So: the benefit of aid would be the aggregated value of all the lives saved. The cost would be the cost to the sender plus the effects of economic distortion caused by ill-adjusted incentives. And these consequences need not be abstract. Weakening a developing economy is exactly the opposite of that you want to be doing, as the poverty = low GDP was what caused people to starve in the first place!!!
 
One has to consider the costs and benefits of an intervention before making a decision, otherwise we are guilty of exactly the same immorality that we were trying to fight. All we can hope to achieve with irrational interventions is to prevent someone from dying by making somebody else die instead. (Hows that for emotional?)
 
And I agree with that thing about the fish.
 
posted by Eva
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
My formatting is all over the place in that one, apologies.
 
posted by Eva
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
I too was surprised by how much Malthusian spirit your original post evoked. I have a different critique.
 
A recent, credible scientific study suggests that generosity may be partly genetic  depending on the amount of activity of a gene linked to social behavior in humans and at least one social animal (the vole). The free abstract is at http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1601-183X.2007.00341.x   (Note: the full text costs $3  so much for the generosity of the publisher, who did not fund the research but can collect the toll regardless.)
 
Social factors clearly influence generosity as well  and generosity affects the quality of life of all of us, so it does matter. But people have different dispositions, and will usually end up doing what they want to do anyway. The result is the world we have today. The issue is what to do about it.
 
The original essay by Louis Pascal was commendable in its major intent, but it did remind me of a newspaper story a year or two ago, about a mathematical genius who made a fortune in real estate (apparently due to his mathematical skill plus getting in at the right time, vs. the usual method of personal relationships plus the right time). He so much wanted to help the poor that his effectiveness suffered because he didnt have decent business clothes, since it would be wrong to buy them when poor people needed the money more. He had millions of dollars, but was using it less effectively due to an issue with spending a few hundred.
 
Giving to Oxfam is great. But most people are not going to give $30,000 of their $50,000 annual salary as Pascal suggests, based on a syllogism about a king, ten prisoners, and a gallows. So lets look at two other ways to maybe save the 500 million people who are set to starve to death in the next 50 years.
 
The war in Iraq has been estimated to cost the U.S. $2 trillion, when the full costs of disability for U.S. citizens have been paid. Its clear to almost everyone that the whole war was an unnecessary fraud, that it has left this country far worse off, and that no good end is in sight  yet Congress is likely to vote another $40 billion, because that much money going to well-connected insiders at enormous profit margins is too much for our system to resist. A few hundred more top people devoting their lives to preventing unnecessary wars, or funding others who do, might have made the whole thing go away before it started  and could do the same now with Iran. Two trillion dollars would provide $4,000 of resources each toward preventing the deaths of all the 500 million scheduled to starve.
 
Long ago when I was in 7th grade I looked around and realized that if all the unpopular or outcast kids disappeared tomorrow, they would quickly be replaced  by other classmates not currently unpopular. And if the new ones disappeared, they would be replaced in turn. The social dynamics of the classroom as a whole included some outcast slots, and strong pressures that they be filled.
 
So the question is, how does it happen that many human societies routinely create outcasts who have nothing much wrong with them (including most of the 500 million who without intervention will starve)? If we could see whats going on here, we might come up with strategies to prevent or at least reduce it.
 
For example, on a personal level, how could we live so that we dont contribute to ostracizing people who have done nothing to deserve that  in our immediate circles, and worldwide? And politically, what policies or other measures could we support toward this end?
 
We might start by exploring how modern poverty is created, and maintained by specific government and business decisions. It does not just happen. Nor does it mean that certain groups are lazy.
 
posted by John S. James
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
Perhaps the most powerful argument against saving poor people from starvation (one Im willing to entertain but probably not accept) is that they are then more likely to reproduce. If it is the case that their immediate environment is unable to support them, this may not be a very happy outcome.
 
It is horrible, of course, to even suggest that genocide by neglect is a solution to over population, but it is the only argument that stands - either you play god by saving people (but committing their offspring to a life of misery) or you do the same by simply killing them by denying them help. No luxury watches involved, and logically, its quite difficult to reject any one side.
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on December 10, 2007 #
 
Lets try a re-framing. Sorry if I ramble a bit; I dont have time to be more cogent today.
 
Poverty is normal. Although outright starvation is not normal, sustenance farming and occasional famines are. As is giving your produce and daughters to the local lord. Affluence is recent and strange. A diamond-shaped society, with most people in the middle, is recent and strange.
 
How can we spread it?
 
One thing that seems to have worked well is manufacturing and trade under the effective rule of law. See also East Asia.
 
Maybe the best plan is to (1) support projects like the OLPC and Project Witness and (2) keep buying crap you dont need. Your profligate waste is the wealth and development for people in Malaysia.
 
(Im as wasteful as the next guy, but its sometimes appalling just how tacky and pointless a lot of the things Americans buy are. You have to wonder what theyre thinking about us when they assemble those talking Santa statues.)
 
Aside: What if you had to choose between your own life, and all remaining elephants, say? I literally dont think I could live with myself after letting an entire order perish from the earth.
 
Anyway, it does seem that people normally have as many offspring as they have the means to, always pushing themselves to the very limit. For some reason, people in developed nations dont seem to do this. I dont think it comes down entirely to contraceptives, because some groups (unfortunately I dont remember which) regularly practice infanticide to keep their populations at the right level; so this is an open option even if contraceptives are not available.
 
So I do buy the argument that supplying people with food who are on the brink of starvation isnt going to help, because it will stimulate population increase. Although this conclusion does feel rather cruel, even as I come to it.
 
(Although one might say that we can just keep giving more aid, when the starving people we saved start to have starving children. Maybe we can.)
 
But lets figure out how to bootstrap more and more of the world into economic development. Helping people get rid of feudal-type rule, and fixing the existing bugs in our way of globalization, seem like good steps to take.
 
How does this sound for a goal? A relatively small number of people living off a relatively small portion of the Earth, performing creative and service jobs while automation takes over almost all of the basics. The only conscionable way to achieve this, starting with the low population, is by ramping up technology and development (or whatever it is) until most of the world starts having small families like we do now.
 
So maybe you should donate your funds to the NSF.
 
No?
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
Okay, let me try
 
The question (unless I misunderstand) is: Why arent I helping starving people in the third world?
 
1) Morality is a cultural/evolutionary construct that has no objective definition. If I define morality as an agreement between equals not to harm one another (which I think is the actual, unspoken, definition of morality), then Im under no obligation to act on the behalf of starving third-world persons (and certainly that is exactly how most people behave, even if they dont describe their actions in those terms).
 
2) In the real world, no one acts in a completely logically consistent manner. Pointing out flaws in reasoning is only useful when backed up by an emotional plea  and still both the plea and argument can be dismissed (for any or no reasons). You cannot demand that people think or behave in a certain way (well, you as a private citizen, the state can go a little farther).
 
3) In many of these countries (or at least the surrounding regions) not everyone has a distended belly and flies in their eyes. There are often a wealthy few followed by a vast gap and then the poor. Shouldnt the responsibility of helping the poor fall more on the shoulders of their neighbors/brothers? If there is any kind of moral imperative, it certainly should include them  but is there any evidence, for example, that Africas rich are trying to stop hunger in their region?
 
4) Although you say there is no evidence, there are arguments over unintended consequences of food aid. The arguments could be enough (even if the arguments against arent sound) to deter someone from assisting on their own, especially since they cannot judge how effective a program is on their own.
 
After reviewing my own arguments, Im now going to avoid helping starving people in the third world  in the hopes of annoying you, personally. So now it is your fault. :-)
 
posted by David Rouse
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
David wrote:
 
Anyway, it does seem that people normally have as many offspring as they have the means to, always pushing themselves to the very limit.
 
No, this is inaccurate.  People have as many children as makes economic sense for themselves, which for peasant farmers means as many as they can, because at large percentage of those children die at a young age, because children make great laborers, good even at a fairly young age for tasks like watching sheep and babies, and because families are structured such that adult children take care of elderly parents.
 
When industrialization hits, babies stop dying (that is, the infant mortality rate drops from 50+ percent to something much lower), and particularly when large numbers begin moving to cities, to work in factories, etc., birth rates adjust dramatically within 2 generations.  This pattern, quite visible among my ancestors (my grandmother had over 100 first cousins, I have something like 20-25, and my children and grandchildren will have far fewer), and in many parts of the developing world today.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
Ahh, so that explains it. Thank you.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
Just imagine that that last sentence of mine isnt a fragment. :)
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
David Rouse:
 
You have an awfully particular definition of morality.
 
Morality is a cultural/evolutionary construct
 
And therefore it is meaningless?  I dont follow.
 
Pointing out flaws in reasoning is only useful when backed up by an emotional plea  and still both the plea and argument can be dismissed (for any or no reasons).
 
This is a pretty dubious line of argument.
 
Shouldnt the responsibility of helping the poor fall more on the shoulders of their neighbors/brothers? If there is any kind of moral imperative, it certainly should include them  but is there any evidence, for example, that Africas rich are trying to stop hunger in their region?
 
Where exactly does Aaron exempt them from moral imperative?
 
The arguments could be enough (even if the arguments against arent sound) to deter someone from assisting
 
You describe a tragic society which is far too uncritical.  Which indeed suggests that appeals exactly like Aarons must be made more frequently and more visibly.  If these someones are so easily swayed by unsound arguments against change, why could they not equally be convinced by good arguments for.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
Tom Berger wrote:
 
It is horrible, of course, to even suggest that genocide by neglect is a solution to over population,
 
Yes, and its not a remotely effective solution either.  Putting girls in school has a much larger impact.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
Just to clarify what I was saying above:
 
The goal state I mentioned is my thinking for one or two or three centuries hence.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
on the population theory: i used to believe as many of you do about populations in poor countries. you had to let them go, or not provide resources to stimulate possible pop growth. it seems intuitive, but weve abandoned plenty of people, and it hasnt worked. my now ex husband arguing with me when we met made the point that the only way to lower birth rates is to raise quality of living and extend life spans. i was stumped, annoyed. i went and looked at a lot of data current and historical. every damn thing bore him out. i had to review my philosophy about the nature of humanitarianism. indeed, the best way to boost fertility is to let people die at a high rate.
 
on the other hand, im so with free marketers on subsidies. and id like to see imported crops subjected to tariffs when theres a native equivalent- not so popular, but more powerful countries cant help but getting predatorial. thats just the nature of competition. that could go to subsidies within developing nations on things like fertilizer and seed. whats good for the goose is not whats good for the gander.
 
Barry Kelly: there is enough. the frustrating thing is that since the green revolution there has been enough food. theres just about enough drugs, and certainly the resources to make them. theres enough knowledge, plenty of education. theres natural resources, if anything, too much.  So why hasnt it gotten out there? its illogical to assume that it could be the fault of the non-recipients.
 
Joe: Ive been. The clothes thing was really sad and shocking. but aid doesnt create poverty- thats obviously temporally impossible. at most you could claim it perpetuates it. but it doesnt. like everything else in africa, its complex. sometimes aid helps, sometimes it hurts. sometimes it pulls regions through a bad time so they can get on their feet again. some aid supports dictators. some aid destabilizes them. back to my favorite example- zim. aid to one group is likely to undercut mugabe, aid to the other might very well keep him in power longer. free market is not an incantation that makes everything better. and free market isnt the cause of all ills; sometime it works, and we should give it its head. sometimes it doesnt, and we should step in.
 
its obvious that things get better around the time women get power and education. but i dont know which way that causal arrow points, or if theres a factor that causes them both. its not the sort of thing you can try out in a lab.
 
education is an endpoint for a lot of these situations. people need roads and cell phones. they need relatives that travel and strong remittance lines. developing countries are perfectly capable of building schools and putting people in them, provided the logistics are there. i mean, fuck, they are trying so hard right now. they have invented education routes most westerners would never have imagined. we dont need to go tell them Education Is Good and march them into education camps. corruption and political instability are the opposite of infrastructure. and all of these problems arise when infrastructure collapses. im not saying collapsing infrastructure is an exclusive cause, but it certainly occasions all of the above and more.
 
but aarons post were certainly oversimplified and flawed in practicality, morals aside. the analogy was reductionist past the point ofincoherence, etc etc etc blah blah blah. except im not sure i saw him endorsing more than the thought experiment and a couple charities he believes in. the thought experiment worked beautifully. putting the moral scale in your mind forces you into arguing the morals, but mostly more than. you start discussing actions, arguing plans, bashing ideologies together with the thought of suffering people you dont know eight thousand miles away. at the very least, you have to consciously reject them. thought experiments you react violently to are likely to be good ones. by the time youre saying this is impractical! we must do it this other way! bobs idea was stupid, and hes stupid for thinking it! im going off to get the data to back me up! Louis Pascal has already won.
 
posted by q
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
Interesting what brainpower is invested to find  arguments against helping.
 
Its easy, if you have Internet access, are sophist, or realist.
Its wasted, if you ask me.
 
Stop arguing - start helping, yes, on a personal level!
Or simply admit you do not want to.
 
How did this start?
Monetary help. I show you you wont, come on, feel a little knocked, that was, where Aaron started, you remember?
 
Carefully worded to enroll what we can read here, I suggest, at least I thought it was predictable.
 
Maybe Aaron wants to collect all arguments against helping, he never wanted anything else, he wants to watch you?
 
I do something similar since years:
Tell people, that I want to save the world.
Its true.
Whats so terrible about wanting it?
Something must be.
My favourite response?: Its ridiculous. I like short cuts, otherwise these guys start talking about their car or something equally interesting some minutes later.
 
No, its my decision to live, I would choke otherwise. I see my mission in making this world a better place. Not more, not less. Funny is, I see your mission is the same. Some are out for small improvements, some for bigger. Love your family - better place, love your mistress - better place - off your family - worse, love your job - better place, if you are hospital nurse, difficult to say in general, if you are farmer, worse, if you are arms dealer.
If you are well-educated, and you make an effort of showing this, seemingly forgetting that nothing is as easy as collecting wise data today, HELLO, this is the Internet!!! If you are well-educated, you probably think you are intelligent - test it, you would suffer from lying at yourself then, otherwise you are educated, but not intelligent.
 
Its easy!
 
All humans are equal
 
If you say you admit this, you have to want to save the world. Basta.
 
And if you do so, tell the world - it is a really good way to get to know your adverse. 
You save tons of time.
 
You do not trust organisations?
 
Go down the street and help somewhere close to you, if you are afraid an organisation will spend your money wrong.
There are people near you who need help too.
Forget Africa, I and some others will take care.
You are one of those who are perfect to help close to you then probably, a very special mission, congratulations! There are enough who would prefer to spend money.
 
Or create an aid-project and control the business model.
 
Donate for a webcam in Addisabeba, that shows where and how and even through whom some others money helps. Write a self-help-book and earn money you can help others with, about how happy watching Addisabeba-channel can make western civilisation - you suddenly realize how well-off you are.
Maybe this can convine some others, to install their own channel, or this could be your chance!.
If your prospering Where-does-half-of-my-donated-money-get- food-for-the-poor-channel needs employees, relax ! Again only half of it will vaporize, if you are lucky, you can donate the rest directly when you visit your firm.
Worth to consider, that it is more important that half of the money ends as help, than that there is no help, because half of the money could get lost, until another you has an idea how to improve the aid-system.
-sarcastic.
 
New media will improve a lot as to this. We are under control - and we can get our help under control. We can help directly soon.
By the way, this is what I prepare.
Read it and forget it.
-direct.
 
Maybe we can convince cinemas to show trailers with starving kids, telling that half of your popcorns cost will be spent for Unicef, and reopen the doors.
 
But oh, I forgot, all arguments for feeding the starving are reversed, beacause this supports non democratic governments.
A really good argument, at the first sight.
That something is complicated does not mean, that there is no solution.
 
I hope you get me when I switch from being direct to being sarcastic, UPDATE: I added it sometimes.
 
Adopt children from these countries.
-direct.
 
What is the strongest human wish for life ?
 
Could it happen, that money does not make happy?
 
Did you know that people in Nigeria are the most happy on earth?
 
True, direct and sarcastic.
 
@David Rouse: Did you know that painting and dancing are cultural, let us say evolvements too?
We are the creators, so we decide.
We can waste our time on investigating what may be genetic and what aquired - or we think how we want to be.
Imagine, there is free will!!
 
Have there ever been so many and so long comments?
WHO gets emotional here? I do, I was angry, I got a terrible headache - so I started to write. I feel better now.
WHY do you write such a long list? to the one who feels no moral, David.
 
If starving people get food, they will get condoms too, to anotherone up there.
Besides the fact, that I directly want to tell you shame on you for being afraid, that they are more likely to reproduce.
 
Contempt is a cultural/evolutonary construct too, one of the damaging. I should feel sorry for you.
 
But this is, why I do it my way, there is no way to argue with links or posts or numbers.
This is the result.
 
PS: I wish my English was as good as my German.
 
posted by Lilo
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
corrections:donate money, happiestand probably a lot more..
 
posted by Lilo
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
Aaron, I followed your writing for many years, because Ive always found it to be refreshingly clear and logical.  So this statement, and the direction you seem to be going with this piece, is very disappointing.
 
Emotion can never, never be an aid to reason or logical thought, for the very clear reason that, by definition, an emotional statement is designed to push your opinions in a particular direction  irrespective of the evidence.
 
For integrity of thought, emotion must always follow after reason  one should think dispassionately about a subject and weight the evidence.  Once you come to a conclusion, then you can feel good about yourself  because you know youre doing whats correct.
 
Be wary of arguments laden with emotional terms and hot-button phrases  they are designed to get you to switch off your brain.
 
posted by Ben
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
Ben insists that Emotion can never, never be an aid to reason or logical thought, for the very clear reason that, by definition, an emotional statement is designed to push your opinions in a particular direction  irrespective of the evidence.
 
Surely this cannot be true. By this logic, arguments can never aid reason because they are designed to push your opinions in a particular direction  irrespective of the evidence. Surely thats absurd. Reasoning involves balancing a number of forces going in a number of different directions and I see no reason why some of those forces cant be emotional. This is especially true in moral reasoning. (Antnio Damsios book Descartes Error provides a neuroscience argument for the necessity of emotion in reasoning.)
 
I am, of course, opposed to hot-button emotional arguments that lead you to stop thinking. Im interested in how emotion can be used as an aid to reason  a way to get people to think more, not a way of bypassing thought.
 
Take for example, the classic Wason four card task:
 
Here are four cards. Each card as a letter on one side and a number on the other. You can only see one side: right now the cards show A B 2 1.
 
Which cards do you turn over to verify that cards with vowels on one side have an even number on the other?
 
People have a really hard time answering this question. (They pick A and 2, because those seem to be the ones described by the rule.) But they find this question quite easy:
 
Here are four people at a bar. One is drinking beer, one diet coke, one is obviously over 21 and one is obviously under it.
 
Which people do you need to check out to make sure no one under 21 is drinking alcohol?
 
(They pick the beer-drinker and the under-21 kid, since those are the people you need to be suspicious of.) Logically, theyre the same question. Practically, people find the second a lot easier to solve.
 
I think there are a number of emotional things that can aid thought in this way.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
Aaron,
 
I believe the current hypothesis for explaining the Wason test is that the two versions hook into different parts, or modules, of the brain  one for social reasoning, one for abstract reasoning.  I dont see emotion helping out here  its more about pattern recognition activating the right brain circuits.
 
And of course the social reasoning circuits of the brain can sometimes give a logically incorrect answer, too.  Which is why we should strive to hone abstract reasoning.
 
Emotion is essential for deciding what kinds of things you care about, for sure.  But it is worse than useless when it comes to determining the correct course of action in any given situation, or the truth value of any given assertion.
 
Thats not a good or fair analogy.  Arguments that rely on evidence and logical reasoning from stated assumptions are not irrespective of the evidence  precisely the opposite.
 
If one cares about saving people from starvation, then one should care about effective means of doing so.  A set of emotional images of grateful children receiving aid handouts, while heart-warming, is massively insufficient evidence for deciding one way or the other.
 
posted by Ben
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
q and Lilo, thank you for your words.
 
Its not a question of solving all the problems right now.  Dont worry, your 50$ check to UNICEF (or whomever) isnt going to do that.  Its probably not about reaching for the solution at all, I think our lives are too short for that.
 
But, if I can help one person, Ive made the world a better place.  No amount of consumerism will ever do this.  The money you paid for your TV or t-shirt arent going to help anyone in the third world.  They received their pittance back when they made it.  Buying more stuff doesnt increase their take, it just prolongs the inevitable end of that company, that plant and puts more money in the shareholders or owners bank account.
 
If, by helping my neighbor, I cause them to produce more children then those children are my neighbors now, too.  I will help them if I am able.  This giving is not based on an economic decision past the acknowledgment that I have excess (which itself is probably an economic decision).  My work produces monetary profit for myself and my family, I want to use that to give someone else comfort.
 
either you play god by saving people (but committing their offspring to a life of misery) or you do the same by simply killing them by denying them help
 
I think this is not the question we should really be trying to deal with.  Like I said before, our 50$ (or 500000$) donations arent going to be the end of anything.  Similarly, my inaction will not be the end of it in the other direction.  I believe that the means are the ends.  Charity does not seek to bring about the end of poverty, it seeks to bring comfort to those stuck with it.
 
We cannot even hope for the end of the suffering Aaron is talking about unless we consider the ending of this suffering something worth doing.  That ending is the process were trying to engage in.  In the words of Martin Luther, sin boldly.  If youre going to screw up, at least make sure youre headed in the right direction when you do.  If youre going to screw up charity, do it by giving too much (time, money, food, clothes), not too little.
 
The call out to emotion is attached to reason not for justification as much as it is for attention.  It is very reasonable for us to ignore this issue altogetherthe issues are too complex, someone else will do it, nothing will help, etc.  But, in an appeal to emotion, the reader is forced to stop and think about it.  This isnt science, were not in a lab, there is no way to separate my mind from my emotions.  So I exercise restraint and go forward with the expectation that I am not controlled by either and both may contribute to my decision to act.
 
sorry if this is a bit scattered, this is something my wife and I have been wrestling with for awhile so Ive had thoughts stored up.
 
posted by Adam
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
The original hypotehtical doesnt hold water for me. First, how can we compare victims who have no control of their destiny with victims who have significant if not complete control of their destiny?
 
Further, where does it end? If I dont crusade against cigarette smoking am I also in violation?
 
Im also disappointed that Barry got so much criticism. His commentary has been valid and illuminating.
 
posted by pwb
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
Somewhat related http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/view/id/62
 
posted by Conny
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
Something on this page is forcing the page width to be very wide, making the page difficult to read. Perhaps our host would be kind enough to track it down.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December 12, 2007 #
 
The best way to encourage people to donate more to aid is to act like a pretentious little American twerp.
 
posted by Steve
 on December 13, 2007 #
 
depends on how many twerps you reach, and how many people :-)
 
When I say you and I within the following, I do not adress a certain you, just the opposite position to my view, I am all but a saint, but I follow my view.
 
If i where you, I would have answered: Yes, I am a murderer, luckily I will not be judged for it.
Some believe they will, but have chosen the big fogg too.
 
As I am I, I answer: Yes, I am a murderer, so I try to do my best to stop this, because I feel that this is wrong
 
(I feel(!) AND what I go for due to this reason for deciding, is logical, but my goal is  to do the best I can, I could fail with my plan then, but reach my goal )
 
The question where does this end shows the basic
misunderstandings, which the attempt to reach pure rationality regularly produces. Interesting to watch the  meta-structure of Self-Excuses.
 
Basically, whatever could end at the goal, not theoretical discussions besides and beyound.
 
Whatever tendece your rational argumentation focusses on, it is rooted in and interweaved with feelings. If you would follow back (without collecting arguments, just follow back the single thread (=honest): WHY do you try to argue (besides the point) ?)  you would find a story of decisions to find excuses, based on emotions)
 
The answer is exactly what Aaron said: you do not want to be told you are bad. Plus: You think to be bad is bad and you do not want to be bad. more: you would want to be able to say you are good.
It would be interesting, why you think to be bad is bad ;-)
(The one who would be really really evil would be so, because he has NO reason, all others have a story they believe in, what they do could though be valued evil in its outcome. direct - or indirect - but I do not judge (!) I just watch, sometimes emotional,but the next day more relaxed - and then I focus on solutions)
 
BECAUSE you try to argue rational, what can not really be argued about, you (have to) miss the point - on purpose, hopefully unconscious (see suffer from lying to yourself)
 
Human Rationality, ( should admit the use of both parts of the brain finally, it is even quite  appropriate, as they interact in one head) would not try to walk along all possible threads, except it feels offended - for example by the truth it does not want to face.
 
visualize, there is a cake at the end of the room.
someone asked you to bring her the cake in this room. why run into every room of the tower of arguments, to see if there might be reasons not to ask fort he cake?
except because you do not want to bring her the cake.
If you return to her, you will have to lie - or tell the truth.
Or you try to find arguments, why she should not ask for the cake.
That is what you are doing.
 
I quote Aaron, who pretends to quote W.B. Ellis in order to quote L. Pascal.: At any rate, primarily what I want to find out tonight is how important it is to you for you to act according to your own definition of right and wrong. In other words Im not interested in knowing what sort of behavior you think is right or wrong but merely how committed you are to living up to whatever standards of right and wrong you possess.
 
posted by Lilo
 on December 14, 2007 #
 
I noticed you mentioned Peter Singer, but didnt talk much about him.  Maybe you should have mentioned his simple example of encountering a child drowning in a shallow pool.  You have the option of saving the life of the child, and all you have to sacrifice is some of your time and getting your shoes and pants wet.
 
I was able to get the point immediately since I had taken a course in ethics (where we discussed Singer).  I dont think many of the people who have responded have ever taken a course in ethics.  There are a lot of thorny issues in this world, and no easy right answers.
 
If some people seem to have a difficult time with accepting what was proposed, maybe they should read a little bit of Singer (or other ethics).  Look under utilitarianism.
 
A lot of people seem to be confusing ethics with economics.  One does not have to sacrifice either.  People keep making the absurd claim that you are somehow violating the principles of economics, its inviolate truths, and would be committing a sin, sacrificing ones principles, being a hypocrite, if you didnt follow that simple first rule of economics.  Hey, economics is not a holy faith.  We cant seem to get the free market right (we arent even close, even in the land of the AEI).
 
Arguing this is very tiring.  No one is forcing you to do anything (maybe, thinking).  People dont seem to be arguing against the notion of giving to charity, but against the notion of it being compulsory to give, and to give very generously.  Hey, I do give to charity, but Ill decide how much and if, alright.  But, just to be clear, I do give to charity (see, I am a saint).  But, why shouldnt you be a despicable person if youre living a kings life, while millions of people are starving around the world.  At least have the balls to admit it (but dont be proud of it).
 
posted by Prabhat
 on December 15, 2007 #
 
Daniel Goleman: Why arent we all Good Samaritans?
 
http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/view/id/200
 
(A related talk.)
 
posted by matt
 on December 19, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December  6, 2007
 
Title: The Handwriting on the Wall
 
I recently attended a talk at Stanford by Walter Bradford Ellis, a too-little-known activist and writer on the issue of global poverty and world hunger. Its transcribed from a recording I made. The sound quality was lousy, so apologies if Ive mangled some of the specifics.
 
Good evening. This is the first time Ive spoken before a college audience, and therefore I would like to take advantage of your presence to ask you a few questions before I begin on my prepared speech. Basically I want to know how morally committed the students at a typical good school are, and while I know an audience of several hundred from one school is neither large enough nor diverse enough to give an especially accurate picture, still the results should provide a rough indication of where the real truth lies. Thats sort of an interesting juxtaposition of words. Truth lies I mean.
 
Anyway, as I said, Im interested in knowing how morally committed you are. I must say at the outset, I am pessimistic. At any rate, primarily what I want to find out tonight is how important it is to you for you to act according to your own definition of right and wrong. In other words Im not interested in knowing what sort of behavior you think is right or wrong but merely how committed you are to living up to whatever standards of right and wrong you possess.
 
I was trying to think a few minutes ago what questions I could ask you to find out this information, and it is very difficult to come up with anything satisfactory simply because individual standards of right and wrong vary so markedly. I had to pick a situation which seems perhaps a little silly because it is so improbable, but that is because I wanted as pure a case as possibleone which is in no way connected with any existing world situationso that your prejudices and preconceived notions about a particular situation will play no part in your answers.
 
My hypothetical circumstances are concerned with a person who murders innocent people, and I suspect that nearly every one of you will agree that that is wrong. So please now imagine yourself to be in an ancient country which is ruled over by an evil king who has absolute power of life or death over all his subjectsincluding yourself. Now this king is very bored, and so for his amusement he picks 10 of his subjects, men, women, and children, at random as well as an eleventh man who is separate from the rest. Now the king gives the eleventh man a choice: he will either hang the 10 people picked at random and let the eleventh go free, or he will hang the eleventh man and let the other 10 go free. And the eleventh man must decide which it is to be.
 
Now if death is bad, then on average 10 deaths must be 10 times as bad as one. So hopefully nearly all of you will agree that the eleventh man should give up his life in order that the other 10 might live. But that is not the question I am asking you. Im asking whether you would in fact make that sacrifice if you were the eleventh manif you really did have to decide whether you or they would die. And you knew the king meant business because he did this every year and sometimes killed the 10 people and other times the eleventh depending wholly upon what the eleventh had decided.
 
Now I am about to ask you for a show of hands, but of course I realize that few of you know yourselves so well that you can be certain of the correctness of your answerespecially if your answer is yes. So I will simply ask you to hold up your hand and answer yes if you are any more than 50% certain that you would make that sacrifice. Understand?
 
All right, all yes answers, please raise your hands. Let me see, that must be about a third of you. Thats more than I would have guessed.
 
Now let me ask only those who are reasonably certainsay 95% certainthat they would make the sacrifice to please raise their hands.
 
Yes. Thats more like what I expected. Thats at most a tenth of you. I have a feeling that most of that tenth of you are kidding yourselves, but perhaps human beings arent as selfish as I have always thought.
 
Now just two more quick questions. Same situation except that the king says he will let his 10 hostages go free if you will go to prison for 20 years, otherwise he kills them. Thats an easier question to be sure of your answer about than the previous one, so this time answer yes only if you are quite certain95% or better. All right everybody hold up his hand if he is at least 95% sure he would go to prison for 20 years in order to save 10 peoples lives.
 
Well that looks like about three-quarters of you. Again I think you have overly high opinions of yourselves, or maybe some of you are too embarrassed to tell the truth, but I sincerely hope you are correct in your self-assessments.
 
Just one question more now. The king says he will let his people go if you will agree to give him all the money you have and all the money you will make in the future, except of course enough for you to feed and house yourself and take care of all the absolute necessities. In other words hes asking you to be poor, but not so poor that it impairs your health in any way. Again Im asking for at least 95% certainty. All in that category please hold up your hands.
 
Well thats nearly every one of you! Im very pleased; I hope you mean it. Perhaps in fact you do this time. After all, since you have the power to decide whether 10 people die or whether you give up your money, if you made the other decision you would be killing 10 people in order to make money for yourself, and surely that is murder.
 
I see some head-shakingit looks as though a few of you disagree. The king has said, kill these 10 people or Ill take your money. If you kill them, that is murder.
 
Look at it another way. If you are poor and kill 10 people in order to steal their money, that is surely murder. But morally speaking, that situation is exactly the same as this one. In both situations if the people die, you will be rich; if they live, you will be poor, and it is within your power to decide which it is to be. In either situation if you decide that they should die in order that you can be rich, you have put your happiness, or not actually even that, you have put material riches for yourself above 10 peoples lives. That is the moral error you have made and it is exactly the same for both cases. One is as bad as the other and if one is murder so is the other.
 
Anyway, those are all the questions I wanted to ask you. I didnt mean to spend as much time on them as I did, but at least from my point of view it was well worth the time. Thanks for your indulgence, and also for your soul-searchingI guess those werent easy questions to answer if you answered them honestly. Just be happy it was a make-believe situation and none of you is likely ever to really be forced to make any of those rather unpleasant decisions.
 
And now Ill get on to what is supposed to be my topic: world hunger.
 
In 1650 the population of the world was 500 million (500M). Within the next 50 years an absolute minimum of 500M people will starve to death. The UN reports that around 10M people starve to death every year and the problem is only going to get worse as the population increases.
 
Perhaps that figure of 500M is too large for you to grasp in abstract terms. Let me translate it into something more concrete: if those 500M people were all to join hands, then figuring at about 1,000 people per mile, they would form a line long enough to stretch to the moon and backwith enough left over to reach across the United States 6 times. Or if you prefer keeping things more down to earth, they would reach 20 times around the world.
 
The US Armys M-16 machine-gun fires 700 rounds per minute, or about 12 rounds per second. If you drove a car past the line of people at a little over 40 miles per hour, you would pass 700 people every minute. If you used poisoned bullets or some such deadly concoction, you might be able to kill 1 person with every shot as you drove past. If you kept your finger on the trigger for 10 hours a day, 7 days a week, killing 1 person with every shot, it would take you 3 years and 4 months to kill them all.
 
It is a rather gruesome picture, and yet all these peopleand probably many moreare absolutely doomed to die in the next 25 to 50 years. And it wont be the quick, easy death of a bullet, but the slow, pitiful, wasting death of starvation.
 
There is one bright spot in all this, howeverthe legions of the doomed will not really reach quite 20 times around the world. Perhaps theyll really only reach 12 or 15 times around, for most of them are children and their arms are short.
 
Opposed to these ravaged peoples of the world are the gluttons of America. You yourselves are good examples. As future graduates of a good college, it is surely within the grasp of most of you to be making a salary, after taxes, of $50,000 or more within a few years. How much money is that? Well, you could easily take care of all the true necessities of life for $20,000, thus leaving you $30,000 for the luxuries. In America, anyone can stay healthy spending five dollars a day for food. It is not even hard to do. If one really skimps, he can stay alive and well for a dollarfor I have done it. If it can be done in America for a dollar a day, it can surely be done for that in the countries where people are starving. Thus your $30,000 of luxury money could be providing 82 people with a dollar worth of food a daypeople who otherwise might starve. Since presumably if your $30,000 were donated to UNICEF, they would take care to pick out poorer than average people, I think it not unreasonable to state that $30,000 per year over a period of 40 years is enough to keep healthy 10 people who would otherwise starve to deathplus a good many more who would otherwise be malnourished.
 
So you see, I lied to you a little while ago when I said none of you would ever have to make any of those three unpleasant decisions. You will never have to make the first or the secondthe two hardest choicesbut you are this moment confronted with the third: for the 10 who would otherwise starve are the 10 hostages, you are the eleventh man, and hunger is the king. Thus if you decide to go on with the life you were probably planning to lead, you will be letting 10 people die rather than give up your flat-screen television and your cocktail parties. And that is more than gluttony, it is murder.
 
Good evening.
 
Aaron again. Id like to make a few remarks about the speech, but before I do I should admit something. The speech was not given by Walter Bradford Ellis. Instead, it was written by a too-little-known philosopher named Louis Pascal. He published it in the 1980s under the same subterfuge in the journal Inquiry and it was reprinted in Peter Singers collection Applied Ethics. (I have modified it to bring the numbers up to date and shortened it a little to make it more blog-sized.) He justifies the subterfuge as necessary to get readers to more seriously engage in the thought experiment. I do think it would be wonderful to have this talk given in person, however. If you are interested in pursuing this, please let me know.
 
If you do want to help needy people, you can donate to UNICEF or Oxfam.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December  6, 2007
 
An obvious problem with the King scenario, is that one is not culpable for murders other people commit, even if they threaten you / ask you to tell them what to do - especially in the contra-command-flow structure presented in the story.
 
Its also interesting to wonder why it is that the fact that someone is suffering, that it is incumbent upon us to help. Why is that a moral duty? I, for one, dont accept it as an absolute moral duty. It certainly introduces a moral hazard - it can encourage people to wallow in suffering, to depend on future help. It may also be in ones self interest, in a democracy, to contribute to the poor via tax systems, to avoid revolution and help uphold the rule of law.
 
However, it would be madness for us all to forego our above-essential income, and flatten the distribution, because it has many of the problems of communism: lack of incentive to compete, lack of investment base for risky & experimental ventures, and congealing layers of bureaucracy feeding on income redistribution.
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
The questions are these: Do you oppose the deaths of innocent people? Are you willing to make personal sacrifices to stop it? Whether you think someone has a moral duty to prevent innocent people from being killed or whether someone is culpable for not intervening are up to you.
 
Similarly, are you seriously maintaining that promoting an incentive to compete and preventing congealing layers of bureaucracy are more important than the lives of millions?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
Barry, youre going to have to come up with a far better justification than that to avoid looking like a miserable human being, in deep self-denial.
 
Not that your intuition is necessarily wrong, but you should think it through a bit more deeply.  If the only reason you can think of for helping people is that letting them get too desperate might result in violent revolution, well
 
On a more positive note, I hope that you spend some time with those in deep poverty, who, as human as the rest of us, will be happy to share their homes and meals with you, their stories and jokes, their hopes and dreams.  Perhaps it will help you to see the human side of the picture, and you can form a world view less dominated by abstract concepts like bureaucracies and tax systems.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
Bleh.  A bit careless there.  It appears like vanilla denial, not self-denial. :)
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
This little guilt trip has a fatal flaw. Nowhere does this man conclusively prove that by giving my flatscreen TV, I save 10 peoples lives.
 
I agree that consumerism is out of control nowadays, but atleast prove your point. My mom always proved her point during the guilt trips she would send me on.
 
And Barry just might be an idiot.
 
posted by Sohail
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
That seems not very well thought out. For one thing, it is not clear that donating to Unicef really helps very much. Another thing: what if I save those 10 people, but then they go on to have 50 children, that I cant feed anymore? Those 50 will die, so by saving the 10, I have killed 50. Just saying that the calculations are too simplistic. I think most people want to help, but it is not obvious what the best course of action would be.
 
posted by Bjoern
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
@Aaron:
 
Do you oppose the deaths of innocent people?
 
I think the deaths of innocent people are lamentable, but there needs to be a cost-benefit analysis before conclusions are jumped to. For example, Wikipedia.org referencing NHTSA indicates at least 43,443 innocent people died in the US in 2005, without significant outcry - that is, on the road, in automobile accidents. People in the US clearly value the freedom of driving over the deaths of innocent people, for some value of freedom and for some (quite large) value of innocent deaths. Would you trying making a claim using similar logic that, because most people are opposed to deaths of innocent people, they should stop driving? These things are not absolute; that was the main thrust of my point, and why I used phrases like absolute moral duty and for us all to forego our above-essential income.
 
Are you willing to make personal sacrifices to stop it?
 
Sure, I make personal sacrifices all the time. However, I dont sacrifice everything non-essential, or even anything close to that, and nor does anyone else; and trying to browbeat people into feeling guilty because of that is wrong, I believe, for many reasons.
 
Whether you think someone has a moral duty to prevent innocent people from being killed or whether someone is culpable for not intervening are up to you.
 
How indirect does intervention need to be before Is it a moral duty to feed another family for the rest of their lives? And what does feeding them out of ones own economic surplus do to both those people, and the farmers in those regions who are trying to sell food to those hungry people? How does this altruistically-created dependency economy get better - i.e. whats the exit strategy?
 
Similarly, are you seriously maintaining that promoting an incentive to compete and preventing congealing layers of bureaucracy are more
important than the lives of millions?
 
Yes: I believe more people will be saved through the discovery of new technologies, new medicines, spread of education, integration of economies, than would be saved by sacrificing all of those things in order to save people right now. There needs to be a balance struck. These things are not absolute. Your argument just sounds too absolutist to me.
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
A big problem is that it really, really isnt obvious that giving money to UNICEF will save those lives. Aid really hasnt worked very well.
 
Most of the 10 children youre going to save arent born yet. If you spent the money on condoms, not food, would that also count? Or, perhaps, on giving the mother a factory job, which has been in many countries the first step to giving women more power, and they then choose to have less children. Does that count? And if you get the TV she assembled, does it compromise your moral standing?
 
You could, instead, give your money to an aid agency which saves women from dying in childbirth. How does this naive calculus of deaths count her unborn children who then get to die of hunger, later?
 
posted by improbable
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
@Jacob:
 
Barry, youre going to have to come up with a far better justification than that to avoid looking like a miserable human being, in deep self-denial.
 
Like most people, conveying ideas that seem relatively obvious to me is difficult without a relatively large investment in time, because of all the premises involved, explaining them and supporting them with references.
 
Not that your intuition is necessarily wrong, but you should think it through a bit more deeply. If the only reason you can think of for helping people is that letting them get too desperate might result in violent revolution, well
 
No, it isnt the only reason. But I also dont believe in truly altruistic acts, in the literal sense that there is no benefit whatsoever to the actor. And those benefits, i.e. those intrinsic motivations, arent necessarily aligned with the needs of those being helped, especially in dealing with world poverty which isnt nearly as simple as both yourself and Aaron seem to presume. The systemic effects need to be analyzed and cost-benefits evaluated. Absolute statements and emotional guilt-tripping are very poor substitutes for reasoning, and thats what I feel the post Aaron posted is guilty of.
 
On a more positive note, I hope that you spend some time with those in deep poverty, who, as human as the rest of us, will be happy to share their homes and meals with you, their stories and jokes, their hopes and dreams.
 
Indeed. I spent the Christmas and New Year of 2006/2007 travelling around Morocco (GDP per capita in PPP $4,000, according to CIA factbook) and saw many eye-opening things, which inform my less patronizing attitude today. Poor countries have economies too, perhaps even more complex than rich countries, and everyone, everyone, is trying to turn a buck all the time. Injection of subsistence aid undercuts subsistence economies; it can ruin people.
 
For more argument:
 
http://www.spiegel.de/international/spiegel/0,1518,363663,00.html
(Summary:
The Kenyan economics expert James Shikwati, 35, says that aid to Africa does more harm than good. The avid proponent of globalization spoke with SPIEGEL about the disastrous effects of Western development policy in Africa, corrupt rulers, and the tendency to overstate the AIDS problem.)
 
Not to mention, my own home circumstances were pretty modest: a child of unemployed parents in the west of Ireland in the 80s.
 
All this isnt to say that disaster aid, effectively providing a kind of insurance to poor countries, is a bad thing; quite the contrary.
 
Perhaps it will help you to see the human side of the picture, and you can form a world view less dominated by abstract concepts like bureaucracies and tax systems.
 
My view isnt dominated by abstract concepts, but rather by a synthesis of eyes on the ground, economic thinking and opinion pieces that I found convincing.
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
@Sohail: I might be an idiot, but I suspect youll have to expand on your reasoning before you convince me :)
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
Oh man Barry likes to type! After your elaboration, you dont seem to be an idiot. Perhaps just pragmatic.
 
I think someone said about donating to Unicef. I think that is idiotic. They have a business model that revolves around needy people. To keep the model going, you need needy people.
 
Micro-financing is the way to go. It is win-win for everyone. The investors, and the borrowers.
 
posted by Sohail
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
So how about the people that starve since I no longer buy products with my extra money? How about instead of giving, we find ways for them to work for food?
 
posted by MC
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
this is me, thrashing. god its hard to give effective aid. as a giver, youre not only disconnected from the lives of these people, but from the accountability of the process. honestly, i want to give, but it goes so wrong so fast.
 
a hell of a lot of the worlds starvation is political. for instance, mugabe specifically starved the western part of zimbabwe because that was the seat of power for the opposition. so that gets to an interesting question. why in this example dont you try to kill the king? i mean, the king isnt hunger all the time. sometimes its just the goddamn king. i guess though if there was a pass the hat on hiring a hit on mugabe, id throw in my disposable income. unfortunately, those fuckers tend to be hard to kill.
 
but heres an odd fact- in the next 50 years more people are going to die of obesity related illnesses than starvation. they will be older on average than the ones that die of hunger, which makes them less attractive to help. so you have to ask yourself, at what age do they fall off your love list? and hell, how on earth do you throw money at a problem like that? right now your best bet is probably supporting diabetes research. unlike heart disease, that at least gets your money treating those cute, though fat, kids again.
 
heres another fun fact: malaria hits that 500 million mark a year. most cases dont lead to death, but many lead to short or long term disability. most of them, again, are kids. but nets might lead to starvation through environmental destruction, and fail to prevent the disease anyhow. weve got nowhere on the vaccine. do i get moral brownie points for investing in companies doing research on diabetes and malaria? i have no frickin clue. this shit is hard.
 
outside of assassination and vaccination, for my money your best bet is doctors without borders. theyre not picky about how youre dying, theyre just trying to stop it. but hell, i am still stuck hoping they dont turn out to be corrupt.
 
posted by Q
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
one more thing- anyone that puts cost benefit analysis near deaths of millions need to get out more.
 
posted by q
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
Instead of nitpicking about effectiveness of aid, if we should give them money or food or condoms, complaining that we are discussing about hunger instead of X (e.g. children dead on road accidents, drugs, war, disease), which are just ways of ignoring the real question, we should discuss the ideas proposed, shouldnt we?
 
@Aaron: Do you oppose the deaths of innocent people?
 
What does this even mean? Opposing death is (in a sense) like opposing gravity. Its something that happens and (in the end) cant be avoided. Of course we can do something to extend peoples life and avoid certain forms of death (e.g. most kinds of disease, hunger, war), but we can only do as much.
 
So the question is not opposing to the deaths of innocent people but opposing to avoidable deaths of innocent people.
 
Also I question this innocent label, most people arent and even if when theyre not usual claims of justice dont favor killing the guilty (unless its part of the judicial system), so it shouldnt matter to most forms of popular western morality if we are feeding (or giving jobs or medicine) the innocent or the guilty.
 
Then we reduce the question to: Do you oppose to avoidable deaths of people?
 
My answer is it depends. I oppose to the deaths of people I care (i.e. family, friends, community) but otherwise I dont care (nor expect for others to care about me). If I have to choose between providing better to my family and strangers life (i.e. assuming that Im not directly responsible for their situation) I would choose my family almost everyday.
 
Currently my family isnt spending much beyond essential things (i.e. housing, food, cheap clothes and medicine), we save and invest what we can. My choice is: do I want to spend this surplus on someone elses life today or do I want to increase this wealth and be more effective later.
Wealth isnt a constant resource, we can increase it through many means (e.g. if we create means to use resources (e.g. agriculture, energy) more efficiently we increase productivity and wealth). The choice we have to make is save one life today or save many years later. Should Warren Buffet have spent its money on charities or increased it million fold and then used it to help others. Ditto for Bill Gates.
 
My choice is to improve my wealth to the point I can become independently wealth and then help others, because its much more efficient and effective to do it this way. Also I will help others only because at this point spreading wealth improves global wealth better than my personal actions will do. If I did it otherwise I know I wouldnt be doing the best to increase the worlds wealth. Today I know that I could feed  50 people with the economic surplus I have (ignoring investments), but in ten to twenty years I will help feeding at least a thousand, just because I wisely invested my surplus for the past ten years and plan to continue doing so.
 
Are you willing to make personal sacrifices to stop it?
 
If someone says that they oppose something but arent willing to make personal sacrifices then they dont really oppose it. So inasmuch as I dont really oppose it Im not willing.
 
posted by Daniel
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
Wow, someone actually made the dont help UNICEF, they require needy people, so youre only helping perpetuate poverty argument.
 
By that logic we shouldnt pay teachers. Teachers only educate the ignorant, so they require a large population that lives in ignorance. Helping teachers do their jobs must therefore, I infer, perpetuate ignorance.
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
Development economics is a complex subject.  Resorting to emotionally charged analogies is manipulative and dishonest.
 
Before trying to help, make sure you do no harm.
 
posted by That hypothetical scenario is a terrible analogy
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
UNICEF doesnt have to do a darned thing to maintain the population of hungry people, and we dont seem to have crested the wave of idiots either.
 
Everybody wants a piece of my wallet. I can feed hungry kids or I can dig clean wells. I can give to my church or to the Red Cross. If I give all my money to UNICEF, theres nothing left for Amnesty International.
 
Which is more important, helping to free a political prisoner in China or giving a laptop to a poor kid? Should I help flood victims in Bangladesh and Indonesia, or bums in Chicago? Should you build a house for someone in New Orleans or support your local theater? Is it more important for people to think or to breathe? Is one American worth three Kenyans? Is one Kenyan worth three Americans?
 
Its got to add up somewhere, and that somewhere is in Quicken. But it doesnt add up and it never will. Why cant I live perfectly?
 
posted by Dan Lewis
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
The scenario appears to assume an infinite food supply.
 
The moral question becomes a lot tougher if the supply is assumed to be finite.  I believe this tougher question more closely matches reality.
 
posted by Lloyd Dalton
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
Sohail - careful about micro finance. The incentive of micro lenders is to achieve the highest possible repayment rate. Repayment rate is seen as the best indicator of a programs success, and so the micro lenders push extremely hard to reach repayment rates of 90-95% How likely is it that the success rate of businesses in developing countries is actually this high? The strain of reaching 95% payback rates on loans often forces the poor women who receive them to resort to prostitution.
 
I think we should work hard to solve these problems, but it is important to understand that there is no panacea.
 
posted by term
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
I think someone made the point that a lot of it is political. I would tend to agree with that. Perhaps my suggestion not to donate to Unicef is idiotic but the teacher analogy isnt appropriate. You dont benefit from keeping people ignorant. Those people just dont go to school and go flip burgers.
 
My beef with Unicef-like agencies is that a lot of them focus on crisis-mitigation rather than crisis-prevention. But Lloyd brings up a good point, there is no panacea. But I would tend to side with an agency whose specific mandate was to alleviate poverty, not feed people.
 
posted by Sohail
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
This is that kind of argument that is superficially compelling, but doesnt really make a lot of sense.
 
Has anyone ever worked out what the consequences of the citizens of a large industrialized nation changing their spending habits in the suggested way would be?  Economic collapse doesnt seem out of the question.  And then who is going to be sending out charity money?
 
Problems like starvation, and other deadly effects of poverty, are serious and tragic and difficult to approach, and hard to wrap your head around properly.  But they arent well served by silly arguments.
 
posted by Mike Bruce
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
In the spirit of the story, my question, Aaron, is simple, what percentage of your income did you donate to poverty this month? This year?
 
Its a nice story, and I believe, cuts to the heart of most modern moral issues. People are willing to turn a blind eye.
 
posted by Callum
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
Lets cut through the verbiage and hit the bottom line:  How many of you have done/are doing something, anything to relieve someones suffering in this world?  Isnt that ultimately what matters?
 
posted by Tim Tyson
 on December  7, 2007 #
 
Barry:
 
Its nice to hear that your original statement was an exaggerated and oversimplified version of your views on the topic. Your responses make you no longer seem like a miserable miser. :)
 
Like most people, conveying ideas that seem relatively obvious to me is difficult without a relatively large investment in time
 
Sure it takes time, but the time is spent in reflection, thinking through the argument, not in the explanation, and yours still has a ways to go.
 
As for the best way of approaching big problems like global poverty and hunger:  It is all to easy to lull ourselves into thinking that donations of monetary or food aid will solve the challenges facing developing countries (almost as easy as ignoring them altogether and doing nothing).  These countries desperately need political and social change, investment in manufacturing, improvements in education and healthcare, construction of critical infrastructure, etc., and dumping foreign grain into the hands of their officials is at best a stop-gap measure, useful in stopping mass death in severe crises, but hardly an effective long-term development strategy.
 
What should we do (speaking as an American)?  Thats a tricky question, but suspending military aid to corrupt dictatorial regimes, committing more fully to the U.N. and global dialog instead of constantly catering to corporate agendas, spending research dollars on development problems, alternative energy, etc. instead of military technology, stopping large-scale sales of small arms to military and paramilitary groups with histories of turning them on local civilian populations, etc. would be good starts.
 
Foreign aid would stretch further if it were devoted to communications and transportation infrastructure, schools, hospitals, etc., employed local workers, rather than highly paid American contractors, and wasnt premised around, for instance, deals to secure oil reserves for American and European companies.
 
And as for Aarons post:  It is the kind of polemical moral argument meant to kick up a discussion, rather than a serious suggestion that we all donate our life savings to Oxfam and start living on $5/day.  And as a conversation starter, it is quite effective.  Kudos.
 
Q said:
 
how on earth do you throw money at a problem like [deaths from obesity]?
 
A good start would be forming national and international agriculture and food policies decreasing the price of real food, giving it a chance against the processed chemical mixtures most westerners eat.  After that, we can start in on advertising directed at children, better research into foods effect on the body, etc.  Not that this is likely to happen, given the immense power of the big agriculture lobby (ADM, et al.) in America.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on December  8, 2007 #
 
Organic Holiday Cookies made from scratch are available for Christmas time, visit www.wildfloursbakery.com. I think they only ship baked goods in the usa though
 
Additionally their slogan is, Ending world hunger, One Bite at a Time, and are donating 10% of sales to Gleaners Community Food Bank and Other Charities
 
The Cookies are just delightful, it is rare to find made from scatch, delicious Christmas Cookies and Wildflours has them. Check it out, also they care Gluten reduced and other organic products, cool place
 
posted by milano stevanovicci
 on December  8, 2007 #
 
Aaron, I think it is time to connect you with Lilos blog. Please follow her actions in future, and feel free to contact her/me if you want. I wanted to present you my tool earlier, but I guess the mails I sent to you were too wild: Once again, the Aaron in this story has nothing to do with you. I started to write about this character years before I stumbled over your blog. But when I did so - and started to realize half a year later,when returning, that you seem to be out for the same, I thought your group would be the right one to create the tool open source. Until now, I could only find investors, who want to earn money with it. But it will be free though, as we start with the universtiy now.
Lilos actual blog is just a try-out for the bigger project, but it happened, that I need it, because a lot of very special people will work togehter with me, who are not yet used to new media, and I want to lead them into the project step by step.
 
I have exactly your view - but I think we ( all of us) will have to be tricky in a nice way, to attract people, otherwise they are not able to take this step. The most fascinating way (as to my theory) will be, to engage them for and enable them to create/support aid-projects they are part of, either by taking part, or by creating them from the start - this is possible : if it starts gamebased. Like my project  in a virtual world, and starting with their own personal needs. (You can not reach the many, without the one  (Plato))
 I just read your post and answer immediately:  That I wanted to talk about Open Library in my next post, was due to the clareness of your presentation. (link/mailinglist) - It is a great project: It focusses on aims beyond financial aspects - shows that such projects have to be not only open source but on purpose designed in a way that enables any user to go deeper.
 I wanted to explain step by step,  how to approach virtual architecture as powerfull addition to such 2-d-web-tools, using Open Librabry as first and quite difficult example, which I realized, as soon as I started to design. Virtual worlds offer some not yet fully taken possibilites to create:
 Attraction, View, Explanation, Engagement, Interactionand in special: Selection, the possibility to present the most valuable selection, embedded into guiding architecture at a changing virtual representation-structure, like exhibitions in a real museum 
Open Library is so powerful, because you and your group love books - and have thought of the dream of how to be able to work or just act with this love - in addition and even leading back to reallife librabries-  you did not think about any financial aspects - you want to engage, motivate and enable humans to interact, get committed and go deeper. You engaged, for what you love  and there is always a possibility to engage for what you love in order to help others at the same time  actually this ist he most fulfilling way to engage.
These should be the goals of new media projects.
And there should be a creative method to motivate and engage others for the creation of such projects. The interaction possibilities of virtual worlds are perfect for this. There is a special project  for the One Laptop Per Child-project included into the big picture, that is related to Lilos storytelling you will be able to follow the project now.
 
posted by Lilo Merlin
 on December  8, 2007 #
 
As I see it, the concept of giving money for the aid of the poor is already working in a variety of forms: from UNICEF to the global brands opening production plants in underdeveloped countries, paying minimum-possible wages and offering a maximum competitively priced product to its western customer. Arguing the donation of ones complete extra income is proving extreme, and a bit difficult, since theres only the emotional note to rely on. The same reasoning could lead to the decision of donating more than your income on a regular basis. And since a considerable percentage of participants chose to be imprisoned in order to save other peoples lives, the decision would stand out, too!
 
posted by cosmin
 on December  9, 2007 #
 
I have a suggestion in mind for the problem of hunger. Imagine if the President of United States would declare that we would unilaterally feed every starving person in the world. At 10 million people in the world , this comes to 3.65 billion dollars annually at a dollar a day. This might seem like a huge number , but put it against the annual defense budget which is of the order of 532.8 billion dollars. Which means that for less than 1/100 of the defense budget we can eliminate starvation. Such a proposal does not need to be imposed on the citizens of the United States. I believe that it would be whole heartedly accepted
by them.
 
posted by abhinav
 on December  9, 2007 #
 
When Africa has to worry about the social and economic problems of the welfare state, i think you wont be able to call them a third world country any more.  i think we do have a moral and ethical duty to help the best way we can, when we see tragedy in the making.  i do not think the best way is always complete self sacrifice.  Whether you admire or depise Bill Gates or Warren Buffet, do you really think their causes would have been be best addressed by their giving all their disposable income to various charities, thus leaving nothing for them to invest to create the empires they now have?  having amassed this large amount of capital, they are putting it to use in a way that is much more profound than silly cakes i cooked as an elementary schoolgirl in the sixties, giving the proceeds to CARE.  Sure, that was an admirable thing to do, for me, mostly, to advance my education in morals and ethics.  But i doubt it saved very many lives.  Guilt cannot overwhelm our better sense, and is ultimately very destructive to the guilty and the source of the guilt.  Better to put the mask over your face first when the plane goes down, but never forget your moral duty to save those that could not.
 
posted by Wendy Russell
 on December 11, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 27, 2007
 
Title: Sick
 
Im sorry I havent been keeping up with Bubble City. Ive spent a lot of the last few weeks lying in bed and drinking fluids. (With occasional breaks to play Rock Band, much to the annoyance of my neighbors.) Once again, Ive been sick  this time, with four different illnesses.
 
I have a lot of illnesses. I dont talk about it much, for a variety of reasons. I feel ashamed to have an illness. (It sounds absurd, but there still is an enormous stigma around being sick.) I dont want to use being ill as an excuse. (Although I sometimes wonder how much more productive Id be if I wasnt so sick.) And, to a large extent, I just dont find it an interesting subject. (My friends are amazed by this; why is such a curious person so uncurious about the things so directly affecting his life?)
 
One of my goals for this blog is to describe what its like to be in various situations and it struck me that Ive never said much about what its like to be sick. So I figured Id try to remedy that. (Unfortunately, being sick has made this slightly more difficult. I started this post on thanksgiving and now its almost four days later.)
 
Cold: All the time I feel tired and woozy. My throat is sore and Im constantly searching for kleenex to address my nose. Sometimes I feel too hot, like Im burning up. Im always thirsty. Concentrating on anything is difficult. I just feel kind of wasted.
 
Upset stomach: Huge pains grind through my stomach, like its trying to leap out of my body. Food is always followed by pain, followed by running to the bathroom. Im afraid to go out because I wouldnt want to get too far from a toilet. Im always thirsty and the dehydration makes me angry and confused. At times the pain is excruciating and even after it goes I spend some time just reeling from it.
 
Migraine: Ever felt someones nails dig into your scalp? Imagine that their nails are knives and theyre scratching thru your brain and you can begin to imagine what a migraine feels like. Light, sound, touch  everything makes it worse, making the most painful pains even more painful. Even when you quell it with a pill, you still end up feeling woozy and disconnected, as if the pill is just barely keeping the pain at bay.
 
Depressed mood: Surely there have been times when youve been sad. Perhaps a loved one has abandoned you or a plan has gone horribly awry. Your face falls. Perhaps you cry. You feel worthless. You wonder whether its worth going on. Everything you think about seems bleak  the things youve done, the things you hope to do, the people around you. You want to lie in bed and keep the lights off. Depressed mood is like that, only it doesnt come for any reason and it doesnt go for any either. Go outside and get some fresh air or cuddle with a loved one and you dont feel any better, only more upset at being unable to feel the joy that everyone else seems to feel. Everything gets colored by the sadness.
 
At best, you tell yourself that your thinking is irrational, that it is simply a mood disorder, that you should get on with your life. But sometimes that is worse. You feel as if streaks of pain are running through your head, you thrash your body, you search for some escape but find none. And this is one of the more moderate forms. As George Scialabba put it, acute depression does not feel like falling ill, it feels like being tortured  the pain is not localized; it runs along every nerve, an unconsuming fire.   Even though one knows better, one cannot believe that it will ever end, or that anyone else has ever felt anything like it.
 
The economist Richard Layard, after advocating that the goal of public policy should be to maximize happiness, set out to learn what the greatest impediment to happiness was today. His conclusion: depression. Depression causes nearly half of all disability, it affects one in six, and explains more current unhappiness than poverty. And (important for public policy) Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy has a short-term success rate of 50%. Sadly, depression (like other mental illnesses, especially addiction) is not seen as real enough to deserve the investment and awareness of conditions like breast cancer (1 in 8) or AIDS (1 in 150). And there is, of course, the shame.
 
So I hope youll forgive me for not doing more. And hey, it could be worse. At least I have decent health insurance.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 27, 2007
 
Hey Aaron,
 
I was depressed for about 18 months before I admitted to myself I needed help.
 
SSRIs and counseling helped me get over the worst of it, and the experience helped me identify when Im started to feel depressed so I can nip it in the bud.
 
For me, there are two things that help when I feel depressed:
1) Having interesting conversations with new people. Though the last thing I want to do is go to a bar or party, if I force myself to go out with some friends and talk to new people, I return feeling invigorated for days. (This is in contrast to my usual mood; Im generally introverted and feel wiped out from socializing in big groups.)
 
2) Setting a goal that requires discipline. Being disciplined about one thing makes it easier to face the rest of my tasks. Some of my goals have been:
* run 25 miles per week
* give up caffeine (oh, the headaches)
* give up alcohol
* thoroughly clean one room each day
 
Anyway, I can relate to how youre feeling, and I hope your health gets better soon. Maybe the above suggestions will help.
 
Cheers,
Aaron
 
posted by (a different) Aaron
 on November 27, 2007 #
 
Hi,
 
Feeling ashamed is usual when someone has any non-stop conditions. Its worse when people feel pity about us or try to offer advice, we start thinking that we should never talked about it in the first place.
 
I have a migraine problem for seven years now, sometimes entire weeks pass with my head hurting non-stop, nothing making it better. Doctors never found cure or cause. Eventually I learned to live with it, but it doesnt hurt less.
 
Also been living with depression since the early nineties. Therapy helped for a while, pills didnt make real difference, what really helped me is creating comfort zones for my worst fears (i.e. the things that I thought when depressed). For example I was terrified about being unable to get better and work, then losing my job, so I saved every penny I could and now I can pay for years of bills if necessary. While these dont avoid depression, I know that Im safe against my fears. Perhaps this can help you anyhow.
 
Regards, Daniel.
 
posted by Daniel
 on November 27, 2007 #
 
Cold
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitamin_C_megadosage
Try megadosing (20+g/day) on Vitamin C .  Linux Pauling thought it worked.  Even if it doesnt, the placebo effect will relieve your pain naturally.  I use to regularly feel awful with sore throats. Its done wonders for me.
 
Upset stomach
My cousin had an upset stomach yesterday.  My aunt made him eat only simple bread and water.
Take the vitamin C with a meal or an antacid or youll definitely feel pain from the acidity.
 
Migraine
I dont have any experience with this. Ive read that magnesium can help: http://www.ctds.info/magnesium-migraine.html
 
Depressed mood
I feel this way a lot too.  I should really study my mood in a scientific way (http://repositories.cdlib.org/postprints/117/).  It seems to oscillate.
 
I remember one time recently that I got out of a slump.  I started to list all of the accomplishments of my life.  I wrote it in this style: http://www-users.cs.york.ac.uk/~susan/joke/essay.htm
 
Ive done quite a bit for my age.  I started to make a really long list that was very impressive and ironic.  Reading over it, I was surprised. I noticed that my mood was better afterwards.
 
Maybe thatll work for you too.  Or maybe I just naturally shifted moods and making the list was coincidental.
 
posted by Q
 on November 27, 2007 #
 
Have you looked into potential dietary changes since your post some time back about proper nutrition?  Also, have you found the changing of the seasons (sunlight, weather) to affect you negatively or positively?
 
On the last point, when Im feeling down I often, err, find reading my old blog posts often cheers me up.  Looking back at what I was doing or thinking about a few years ago around the same time is interesting and memory-evoking, at least for me.  But maybe not for everyone.
 
posted by Daniel Silverman
 on November 28, 2007 #
 
Aaron: that sounds terrible. I have no direct useful advice. I just wanted to thank you for sharing how you feel. The simple act of writing about your illnesses means you have been able to move beyond the shame. Hope you get well.
 
posted by LivePaola
 on November 28, 2007 #
 
I think a lot of geeks get depression, it appears to go with the territory. Although I think a lot of ppl dont talk about it for the reasons youve mentioned.
 
I used to take large doses of vitamin C (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berocca - cant believe theres a wiki entry for it!). It definetely helps with the colds! It also seem to have some sort of physical effect on how your body feel, very slight, more energy, slighly light headed. For the first few days you can kid yourself that this stuff is awesome and its a panacea for your depression. But after a while you realise that its all just placebo and if you try (or under the right circumstances) - you still cant get out of bed and face the day.
 
Does it help that I told you that? Probably not - but you would have found out soon or later :(
 
Im not says vitamins are completely rubbish - a good balanced diet is important. But I think a bit of councelling is also useful. Or takes the other Aarons advice: do the opposite of councelling, take you mind of your life by meeting new ppl. Ive found that helps a lot (but Im often too lazy to keep in touch and the bed just calls to me, like a warm and cozy womb to crawl back too, away from anything that can hurt me its a lie but I dont care)
 
Also (my last 2 cents, for what its worth) if you can - try to control your ruminations. If anything in life, they can make or break you.
 
posted by N
 on November 28, 2007 #
 
What you label as upset stomach sounds like it could be IBS to me. I used to get that sort of thing (though with slightly different symptoms) when I was younger, though its gone away with a move to a much healthier diet (specifically, a lot more fiber, fruit, and vegetables). Lack of fiber tends to make any digestive issue worse (for most people - some people get worse with extra fiber).
 
I suffer from migraines as well - in my 20s if I got home and got to sleep when the aura was still around, I would be okay. If not, Id be throwing up and out of it for 5 or 6 hours.
 
I only get one or so a year now that Im old(er), and those usually resolve with an OTC migraine remedy, or something with caffeine in it.
 
Finally, regular exercise can have a good effect on all the things you listed
 
posted by Eric
 on November 28, 2007 #
 
Hi Aaron!
 
I just read the comments ( first time, I was really courious) and had to laugh:
 
Outing first: I am not interested in my illnesses, work like hell, cant feel my left hand since about 7 days, (it started with the little finger) - and do not want to know what it might be (besides a brain tumor due to 13 years of addiction to coke light. Sometimes unrequested information just jumps into a surfers face.)  But obviously I know more thanks to self-experimenting than I thought:
 
If you have a problem with your stomach - I would not really recommend the combination of megadoses vitamin C (which by the way will give you some creepy experiences of hot and cold added to the ones you have) AND magnesium (especially no overdose in this case, this will drive your stomach mad) while only eating a piece of bread and thinking of that you have reached most of what others do in all their life as a teenager and the big plans of saving the world or making it a better place seem so logic and are realizeable- but are simply not wanted somehow - 
@ Q :  I was not really sure if you seriously wanted to help him or  ;-) but the essay is great :-)
 
I do not really want to give you advices, but maybe you want them. 
I recommend an adventure - and to invent a trick, in order to be able to have and realize plans and goals that are considered and experienced as impossible, but live happy though. 
When I tried to dismiss mine, I found myself falling into depths my great experiences of black holes had not even touched gradually.
(I am sure I would live happy, if I my day had about 72 hours (maybe a little more)  only my day, while all the others go on with 24 )
 
posted by Lilo 
 on November 29, 2007 #
 
Im not a huge fan of the traditional medical system, but Id hope youd be open to trying all sorts of stuff to see if anything helps. Have you consulted a doctor?
 
If theres anything I can do to help, please let me know.
 
posted by Dan Connolly
 on November 30, 2007 #
 
Wanted to add, that I hope you will soon get well and that I wish you all the best.
 
posted by Lilo
 on December  1, 2007 #
 
Aaron:
 
Hi. FWIW
 
I found that when I was coping with what I didnt even know was depression, the worst thing was that I felt nobody understood or could understand what I was feeling. I accidentally ran across a book in a Cambridge MA bookstore called Depression: The Way Out of Your Prison that showed me that people DID understand, and that was my first step to becoming free of it.
 
Also, as others note, this is the time for Seasonal Affective Depression, especially if you are in the Northeast; get a lamp.
 
I also recommend a daily walk, hopefully in the sun. Just do that one thing.
 
I am so sorry to read this post; obviously youve been making all sorts of interesting and wonderful contributions.
 
All the best.
 
posted by lambert strether
 on December  8, 2007 #
 
Hi Aaron,
 
Thanks for writing about your sickness, for sharing it with us all.  As a depressive I know how difficult it can be to talk about, to admit - a kind of shame on top of the sense of hopelessness or dread. I found what you have written very interesting and moving.
 
I thought I might mention a book I found very interesting: Unholy Ghost: Writers on Depression, edited by Nell Casey - a perspective you may appreciate.
 
I know all of this is something that you can only go through in your own way. But I just wanted to add my voice in saying there are many of us who get a lot out of what you write, who care about how you are doing and who wish you all the very best.
 
posted by amy
 on January  7, 2008 #
 
You have stolen many words which were locked up in my head. Or that of many others.
 
There is an interesting line in The Great Gatsby about how a sick man (not only feels but also) looks very very guilty, as if he had just brought a girl with a child (may not be exact words).
 
The relation between sickness and guilt has long fascinated me.
 
Actually, depressed me is more correct.
 
posted by Anil Eklavya
 on January 16, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 19, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 10
 
Wayne met Samuel, his Google contact, at a San Francisco bar. They were already several drinks in when the conversation turned to business.Well, Ive got the Center all up and running, he said. Thats great to hear. Congratulations. Thats just fantastic. Theres just one problem. Oh? I dont know what to do with it. Oh, dont worry. You can do whatever you want. I mean, well have some requests from time to time but its your project  feel free to do whatever you want to do.
 
But thats just what I mean, Wayne said. I dont know what I want to do. Come on, surely there must be something? Not really. What are you working on these days? Oh, all sorts of things. You know, its pretty crazy as usual. Youre on the Google NDA right? Yeah, and the corporate email system and contracts and everything. OK, so then I can tell you a bit. You know how the job is: tracking down people to co-opt or destroy. Must be exciting.
 
Not usually. Although one exciting thing happened lately. Were doing a manhunt on this NNA stuff. A what? Apparently some kid found out something he wasnt supposed to and were tracking him down. Huh? Tracking him down? Well, he booked when he found out we were on his tail, so we get to use all our databases to try and figure out where he fled to and how to get him back. Hes a smart kid  MIT grad, hacker, etc.  so its actually a really fun puzzle. The guys back at HQ are loving it. Its like their college puzzle hunts all over again.
 
So what do you do when you find him? Wayne asked. The usual, Samuel said as if it was obvious. Co-opt or destroy. But how do you destroy a kid? Oh, thats actually quite fun, although obviously not ideal for the bottom line. Basically we take him out and then falsify a whole bunch of evidence to make it look like an accident. You wouldnt believe the quality of the data forgers we have on staff  best guys in the business.
 
Wait? Take him out  you mean youll kill him? Not usually; bodies are messy to clean up that way. Usually we just expose them to chemicals or shocks or some other brain-rotting substance. They live, but not with an IQ that will be of any worry for us. Wow, geez, Wayne said, a bit taken aback. I had no idea Google did stuff like that. Oh, come on, Wayne, dont be naive. You of all people should know better than that. Oh, Im not be Its just the price of doing business, Samuel continued. Every company has its little hidden costs. Factories dump harmful chemicals wherever seems convenient. Pharmaceutical companies cover up their products harms. Conglomerates bribe foreign governments. Clothing companies engage in human trafficking. Scratch any serious company and youll find some dark little secret. Thats what makes the money go round.
 
Yes, but well, taking people out. Isnt that a bit extreme? Oh, so when Shell takes out labor activists, thats OK. And when GAP condemns young women to a life of involuntary servitude, thats OK. And when GE dumbs tons of PCBs into the Hudson River, thats just fine. But Google messes with one or two people and its suddenly the end of the world? How is that fair?
 
Look, Wayne, Googles one of the ten biggest US companies. If you think were going to keep acting like some little software shop in Mountain View, youre crazy. I know, I know, but I thought Google was supposed to be different. What happened to Dont Be Evil? Samuel laughed. Dont Be Evil was some hackers PR ploy that got out of hand. Paul Buchheit, the guy who made Gmail, suggested it in an early meeting and Amit Patel, another early Googler starting writing it on whiteboards everywhere. A journalist saw it and the rest was history  but dont be mistaken, it was never official corporate policy.
 
But come on, Samuel, just between us, dont you ever feel a little bit guilty about all this? Look Wayne, what good would it do? If I raise complaints about it to my superior theyll mark me as unstable and demote me. If I threaten to go public theyve got an ironclad NDA  theyll take away my house and family with their crack team of lawyers and Ill spend the rest of my life at a minimum wage job. And if even that doesnt scare me, then theyll turn the black ops on me too. When theyre through with me, Ill be such a gibbering paranoid idiot that nobody will take anything I say seriously. So its stupid to even think about this stuff.
 
But what about your superior? Why not convince him? Come on, Wayne, you cant even convince me this is the wrong thing; you think Im going to be able to convince a guy who does this sort of thing his entire life? And even if I do, then what? He gets fired and ruined right along with me. Why bring another person in on this mess? What good does that do?
 
Wayne took a long sigh. But surely, at some fundamental level, youve got to realize this is wrong? Has Google entirely taken away your humanity? Oh come on, Wayne, thats not humanity, thats naievete. Sure, when theyre a kid everyone thinks theyll fight for truth and justice and the American way of not torturing people. But you also want to succeed. And success requires compromise; theres no other way. If you dont compromise then they just filter you out. Youre labeled difficult or uncooperative or insubordinate. Believe me; Ive seen it dozens of times. Ive even done it myself when it had to be done. By the time you get to a position like mine, you begin to realize that this is just the way the world works. And what are you supposed to do about that, huh, Wayne?
 
Look Wayne, Im telling you all this because I know youre a smart guy. Your hearts in the right place, but so is your head. Googles counting on you to be a big success and you cant do stuff like that if you have to worry about every little kid that needs to be quashed. So here, Ill pick up the tab. Why dont you go home and get yourself some rest? And then tomorrow Ill give you a call and well pick out some fun projects for you to work on? Doesnt that sound good?
 
Yeah, Wayne said at last. I guess so. God, I dont know whats gotten into me. I used to be such a hard-head. I know, Wayne, I know. Thats what I like about you. You did whatever it took to get ahead. Look, everyone goes thru this the first time they have to cross a line. I certainly had my fair share of sleepless nights. But you come out of it smarter and stronger. I promise you, you wake up tomorrow morning, youll be a better man  ready to conquer anything. Now go and get some rest. OK, Samuel. And thanks for the drinks. Dont thank me, Samuel said. Thank Google.
 
Tomorrow: Chapter Eleven
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 19, 2007
 
Whens the next post coming up? Im getting awfully curious to see how google takes over the world!
 
posted by Anonymous
 on November 22, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 19, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 9
 
Derren, head of sensitive public relations operations for Google, had to figure out what to do about Jason. Normally Google prided itself on being very flat  few people were in charge, most people worked in teams. But the bosses had decided that public relations had to be special, which meant that all these tough choices fell on Derrens shoulders alone.
 
But Derren knew better than that. Hed previously had a similar position at Yahoo, where the Chinese government made him give up the names of bloggers to their secret police. The guilt wouldnt go away for weeks. Derren was sick of that kind of stress.
 
Google was a company of hackers, so when he moved there he got there he had the programmers whip up a technical solution to his social problem. Now when he faced a tough decision like this, he punched the key facts into the computer and had his team vote on the solution. That way it wasnt his decision  it was simply the wisdom of crowds, the aggregated knowledge of Googles crack team of spooks.
 
Describing Jasons case would be simple:
 
Fresh MIT grad discovers backdoor in key public algorithm. Works at related SF startup. Doesnt yet have enough details to go public.
 
Should we:
 
He always left that last one in there just to make sure his ass was covered. But it almost never got any votes.
 
He sent out the questionnaire and watched the results pour in. There was the support from the kidnapping crowd for immediately seizing the kid and figuring out the questions later, but most of the team supported the more cautious position. Fair enough.
 
He looked to see what staff he had available and dispatched one woman to get more details from the kids boss, just to make sure he was oblivious and dispatched a guy to get to know the kids girlfriend. Finally, he assigned an office drone to monitor the kid and keep tabs on his progress. The guy whod done the original work-up was still available, so he pushed the task back to him.
 
Boy, this job sure was easier without the guilt.
 
Jason started noticing them at the gym. Guys that geeky didnt work out. And certainly not with those dorky glasses still on. And whenever he biked anywhere he was followed by an unusually large number of white Priuses. At first he ascribed things to paranoia  hed been having weird dreams ever since his visit to Miller == but when he got to the office he ran some numbers and calculated the probability of seeing that many white Priuses in San Francisco and realized something was up.
 
Dorks. Priuses. His work on NNA. What did it all add up to? Did the media industry have some secret San Francisco team working on the NNA backdoor? No, that couldnt be  anyone the media industry hired would be way more attractive. And then it hit him  the only organization that fit the combination of stealthiness, geekiness, and obsessive control: Google.
 
Shit, he thought.
 
He looked around to see how they were tracking on him. Open on his screen was a Google query for white priuses in San Francisco. Fuck, he thought, quickly closing it. They knew he was on to them; they were sure to close in on him now. He quickly set up a rule in his firewall to block all outgoing connections to Google servers. He watched his other search queries, his email, his calendar, and his chats all go dead. Soon his desktop search thing fizzled out too.
 
He tried to think of other Google products, but his officemate was laughing at some stupid YouTube video. Oh, damn, YouTube. He blocked that too, along with Blogger. In fact, he blocked the whole Google IP space. There was time to figure out how to circumvent this stuff later.
 
He looked around for other Google products. Surely they couldnt track him with his Google tshirts. But his phone! It not only ran Google apps, but a Google OS. He had to toss it. He removed the battery, ran a magnet over the case, and tossed the result in the trash. In fact, maybe itd just be safer to toss his whole computer as well. At the very least, he changed the password on his hard drive encryption and removed the battery and power cord and stuffed it in his bag.
 
Shit, the dorks were at the receptionist. He had to get out. He ducked under his desk so he could think. Soon theyd be at his desk. He couldnt be here. He vaguely recalled seeing some back door over by the bathrooms, so he crawled that way. Luckily, most of the office was too enthralled by their monitors to notice.
 
He snuck out the door and jogged to the BART station. He bought a new ticket, with cash (just to be on the safe side  hadnt he heard something about Google beta-testing a new public transit program?) He rode the train all the way to Bay Point, on the theory that getting as far away from Google as possible would be a good idea right now.
 
He spent the whole train ride shifty and nervously looking at the other passengers, seeing if any of them were suspiciously geeky. But few people seemed to last the whole ride from San Francisco to Bay Point; mostly they got rotated. So eventually he calmed down and tried to plot his next move.
 
When he got off he began looking for a library where he might be able to get an Internet connection. He was obviously a bit wary of using Google, even though itd be pretty impressive for them to track him from a random library computer, so he went to scroogle.org, a site that let you do Google searches while hiding your IP address. Instead of visiting Google directly, you sent your query to Scroogle, which passed the query on to Google and then back to you, after stripping out all the Google tracking cookies and the ads.
 
For other Google products there was Tor, a clever little app that encrypted your Internet usage and bounced it through three machines around the world before sending it on to its intended destination. At every step, your traffic gets encrypted a different way and delayed a small amount, so that even an observer listening to every single bit of Internet traffic cant keep track of which was yours.
 
Think of it this way: Imagine you want to get across town without being followed by a spy satellite that can see everything from overhead. Well, first you leave your house  the spy satellite can see that, of course  and you head to a department store. Inside the department store, you toss your clothes and buy all new ones. Then, when you come out, you look like a completely different person  the guy using the spy satellite cant tell which person leaving the store is you. Then, just in case the guy using the spy satellite cut a deal with the department stores security cameras, you do this a couple more times with different department stores. Finally, pretty confident youve lost the spy, you head to your final destination.
 
Tor works the same way, only instead of you theres your message and instead of new clothes theres encryption. You first pick out three Tor servers (the equivalent of the department store) that you want to route your message to. First you write out a note saying please send the following message to www.google.com with the message and encrypt it so that only the third computer on your list can read it. Then you write out please send this to [the third Tor server] and the previous encrypted message and encrypt that. And then you write out please send this to [the second Tor server] and the previous encrypted message. Then you encrypt that and send it to the first computer on your list. It decrypts it, follows the instructions, and all the other servers do the same.
 
Of course all of this was for nothing if you ever logged into a Google product or even accepted a Google cookie  a special tracking number that Google send out with every web page they serve. Most browsers automatically save the tracking number and send it back every time you visit something on google.com. Cookies were designed so that when you logged into something like your email, you would stay logged in. The first time you typed your email and password, youd get back a cookie proving youd logged in. Then, every other time you visited the site, your browser would send back the cookie and the site would know you were logged in.
 
But pretty quickly, sites started using this to track all their visitors. Instead of sending cookies only when you logged in, they sent them to every user, allowing them to keep track of people even when they took their laptop to a new place or disguised their connections through something like Tor. Google, of course, does the same, giving every Google visitor a tracking number that identifies their computer forever.
 
Thus, to be sure Google cant track you, you need to do at least three things: never long in, never accept tracking cookies, and use some kind of anonymization of your IP address (like Scroogle or Tor). And thats just for the Web.
 
God, this was going to be hard.
 
Tomorrow: Chapter Ten
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 19, 2007
 
I didnt realise Scroogle had an SSL interface, nice. Although it does beg the question, who promotes Scroogle? Can you trust them? Using their service is just choosing to use them instead of Google. Maybe Ill start using Scroogle through Tor :)
 
posted by Callum
 on November 20, 2007 #
 
A few more suggestions:
 
Jason seems to have figured out Google way too quickly doesnt seem realistic.
 
Also, the paragraphs about Tor and Google anonymization seems to be too out-of-place for a story like this.
 
posted by Andrew
 on January 16, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 18, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 8
 
Poly? Yeah, poly, she said, hunting for her shirt and putting it back on. No sense in being that forward when she answered the door. You mean like polygamous? No, silly, do I look like I have multiple wives? I just have that one You hawait, so what does poly mean? Polyamorous, she said, putting her socks back on. Jason saw her heading to the door and realized he better put on some more clothes of his own. Because putting on some more clothes of Sarahs seemed wrong for the mood. Multiple loves. Jason scurried towards his pants. I dont instantly assume that just because Im seeing one person that means I cant see another. Jason tried to pull the pants up while avoiding any unsightly bulges. I just dont sign on to that arbitrary rule of our culture.
 
But its not arbitrary! Jason insisted. What about jealousy? Sarah opened the door as Jason was struggling to put on his shirt. Jonathan was standing there and she grabbed his head, gave him a long faux-passionate kiss, and then closed the door again in his face. Did that make you jealous, sweety? she asked Jason, a tad mockingly he thought. Oh, Im sorry, honey, she said, making out with him and sliding a hand down his pants. Ohhh, he said. Well now Im suddenly very jealous, he said smiling. She pinched him and ground him against the wall a bit before going to get the door. Well, when you get over it, you know where to find me, she said, pulling Jonathan inside. Uh, whos that? Jonathan asked, pointing to Jason. Oh, he was just going, she said, before dragging Jonathan into the bedroom.
 
Jason tried to get back to work, to figure out the secret code that allowed one to take over the NNA algorithm, but he just couldnt focus. Every time he tried to sit down to do the math, he felt tired or bored or distracted. All he could think about was Sarah. And all he could think about that was how anathema to productivity it was.
 
But there wasnt much he could do. He couldnt get Sarah out of his mind. And even if he could, there she was, just across the office, smiling as if nothing was wrong, and forcing her way back into his consciousness. So the next night he went back there. Sarah started first.
 
Oh, Jason, Im so sorry. I was incredibly rude. I just got so swept up in the moment, you know? Oh, thats OK. Im sorry I wasnt more understanding of your, um, lifestyle. But now? I think I can accept it. Oh, Jason, she said, hugging him, Im so glad. I really do like you. And Jon? Well, I guess I like him too. Are you OK with that? Yeah, I think so. Anything I can do to make it worth your while? she asked before kissing him, starting with his lips and then working her way down his chest.
 
Jason had heard people say that getting laid made them more productive, but he always found it a colossal waste of time. Not only the time wasted with your partner, but also all the time you spent during the day thinking about the time youd wasted or the time you would waste in the future. It made it hard to focus, worst of all now, when something important was at stake.
 
He put all thoughts of Sarah out ofSarah and Jonathan, sitting there, his musclanyway, he put all of that out of his mind and focused on the problem at hand. How did this sequence of bookmarks lead to that particular recommendation?
 
After much procrastination, he cracked the code. There were a series of accounts, call them dummy0 thru dummy15, and a series of pages, call them page0 thru page15. dummy0 linked to page0, dummy1 linked to page0 and page1, dummy2 linked to page0, page1, and page2, and so on. Then dummy15 also linked to an additional page and that was the one that got pushed out in all the recommendations.
 
Jason figured that the clustering algorithm must have discovered this cluster, noticed the odd behavior, and taken it aside for special processing. Not that anyone could know for sure without untangling all that code.
 
Days before, Jason Blakeslee, Googles head of public relations, and received a visit from Samuel Turnbill, Googles head of evangelism. The meeting was coordinated over Google Email, it was marked in Google Calendars, it was recorded by Google Video, and held on the Google campus. In that, it was like many other meetings. And yet, somehow, it was very different.
 
Im sure youll recall NNA, Samuel began, getting down to business. Of course, Blakeslee said. Well, it appears someone found a piece of it that we were hoping to keep hidden. Jesus, Sam, would it kill you to speak clearly? Im head of public relations, not the public. OK, OK. So heres how it is: theres a special control system in NNA that allows us to exercise some influence over the workings of the algorithm, for administrative purposes and that sort of thing. Someone else appears to have discovered the control structure. If this gets out, it could be incredibly damaging. It must be stopped. I understand, Blakeslee explained. Ill put our team on it. Thank you, Samuel said handing Blakeslee a USB thumb drive. Heres a quick explanation and all the relevant logs.
 
And thus the head of evangelism handed the drive to the head of public relations who handed it to head of sensitive operations who handed it to his tech lead who handed it to Mike. Piece of cake, Mike said.
 
The logs showed the IP address and time the perp had contacted Googles servers with his bookmark request. The IP address was a cable modem used mainly by one man: a Mr. Jason Barsto. Barsto had a Google account, which allowed Mike to pull up a pretty decent summary of his entire life: his email, his calendar, his search history, what news stories he liked, where he lived, surveillance photos of his house, the top people he chatted with, and on and on.
 
Now came the fun part: compiling a dossier. Mike skimmed through Barstos life, with the aid of Google technology that helped highlight key concepts and messages, getting inside Barstos head and trying to understand who he was.
 
He started with search. Barsto was a geek, the kind of person who searched Google every time a thought passed through his head. Within minutes, he knew everything from what kind of error messages Barstos computer was showing that day to what kind of porn he enjoyed. it was like a raw feed into his stream-of-consciousness.
 
Just in the past few hours Barsto had searched for:
 
Next came email. Using Google technology developed for targetting ads and improving search, his system pulled out the key concepts and emails in Barstos mailbox. Pretty quickly he learned who Barstos friends are, who his crushes were, who his boss was, and what he did with his free time. Using his Google Chat logs, he found what Barsto liked to gossip about and what crazy links he shared with his friends. (Luckily for Mike, Barsto appeared to be the kind of startup geek who never saw a Google app he didnt use.)
 
Using the calendar, he discovered when Barsto went to the gym, when he went to see his girlfriend, and so on. Connecting this with the Google friend-tracking app Barsto had installed on his GPS-enabled phone, Barsto was able to get solid GPS coordinates for all of these places on a Google Map as well as see where Barsto was right now. They could probably ask his phone to record all of his phone calls for them, although Barsto didnt have that kind of clearance.
 
Since Barsto used Google News and YouTube, he got a fairly good sense of what kinds of things Barsto was interested in and, thanks to Google Checkout, he was able to see all the recent purchases Barsto had made. But  and here was the motherload  Barsto ran Google Desktop Search, which allowed Mike to access any file on Barstos computer. He quickly pulled up Barstos full browsing history and got to see what kind of porn he liked, what blogs he visited, what he was reading about today, which non-Google apps he used, etc. (For people who didnt have Google Desktop Search installed, he got the same data thru Google Web Accelerator.)
 
By the end of the day he felt he knew Barsto better than he knew some of his own best friends. He put the highlights of what hed learned into a report for his superiors: Barstos name and address, his occupation and skill-level, his interests and hobbies, his friends and girlfriends, and (his favorite part) a series of embarrassing or otherwise fun facts that could be used for blackmail or simply amusement. (You wouldnt believe how many people kept naked photos of themselves or loved ones on their hard drives!)
 
He sent the report to his superior and wandered off for a bit to dwell on the power he had as a faceless person deep inside an office park in Mountain View to know every detail of another persons life; a person living just miles north in San Francisco. He wondered what it would be like if he came across him on the street  here, he would know every detail of Barstos life, from the secrets he confided over IM with his friends to what he looked like naked, while Barsto would see Mike as just another random face in the crowd.
 
Mike loved his job.
 
Tomorrow: Chapter Nine
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 18, 2007
 
Im really enjoying the series of stories youre writing. Time to time its a bit paranoid, but most of us are this way, so its really interesting read. I have one thing to note though - in my opinion the name Barsto was overused in this article. I mean my teachers always told me when I was writing some peace to find synonyms for naming stuff and dont get to repetitive.
 
posted by Pacifists
 on November 19, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 15, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 7
 
On his way into the office, Trent saw a pretty young girl and decided to use it as an opportunity to improve his marketing skills. Hello there, he shouted at a small and slender woman wearing a huge black coat. She didnt say anything so he ran to catch up with her. Hello there, he shouted again, this time louder and closer to his face. Umm, hello, she mumbled and tried to hurry past. Whats your name? he shouted. Mm, Jessica, she mumbled. Hello there, Jessica, he shouted. My names Trent and I have a very exciting service I want to tell you about. I think it will revolutionize the way you look at the news industry today. Its called Newsflip and They had come to the end of the block and Jessica had decided to dart across the street, dodging traffic. Trent decided not to follow. Crazy bitch, he muttered.
 
But shortly after he got into the office and settled into his desk, he got to watch another stunningly attractive young thing, wearing a tight blouse and tighter jeans saunter over to his desk. Trent, she said, sounding just happy enough that you couldnt honestly describe her as sounding unhappy, youve got a call from the press on line 3. Thanks Sandy, he said and watched her ass swing as she sauntered away from his desk. He picked up the phone. Newsflip, Trent speaking.
 
Hellllo, there, said an effusive voice at the other end of the line. Im calling from Digital World News Online Monthly and were writing a feature segment about todays top users of NNA. Now, obviously, I want to give Newsflip top billing, so I was hoping you had some time to answer a few questions about your site for us good folks. Why, of course, Trent said chivalrously. Anything for the press!
 
Well, my first question is how strong is your commitment to NNA? Oh, total, total. I know there have been some nasty and false rumors swirling around, but I can assure you those are untrue. We are 100% committed to standing on the strength of the NNA platform, which were committed to as well. Kind of like a man whos chained to the platform that hes chained to, if you know what I mean? Ohhh, I doooo, cooed the reporter in a voice that was less than convincing.
 
And do you have any problems or complaints with it? Have you been doing any research into improving it? Well, honestly, its such a great platform that we have our hands full just using it as it is, frankly. So you have no one working on the internals? No, but its not really necessary as its such a strong foundation for our platform.
 
I see. Well, thank you so much for your time, Mr.  Oh, Trent, just call me Trent. Well, thank you so much for your time, Trent. This has been very valuable for the article. Well, thank you. Bye! Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Um, bye. A long pause. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye! Trent hung up.
 
Nice journalist, Trent thought. He should note that down. What was her name? Hmm, he didnt think she said.
 
Sandy! he yelled out over the office. The girl in the tight blouse scurried over to his desk. Yes, sir? Im gonna take a meditation break for about fifteen minutes. Yes, sir; Ill do the usual. Thanks, Sandy. He again watched her saunter back to her desk. The ran to the small closet hed reclaimed as his meditation chamber and locked the door behind him.
 
It was Thursday, so Sarah decided to knock off work a bit early to go to her street fighting class. They met in the unfinished basement of what Sarah recognized as the old Pets.com building, but Sarah doubted few of the other participants would recognize it as such. Instead, they knew it mostly as the place where they got their noses ground into the cement and left blood stains on the wall, before stepping back and thanking their instructor politely for the demonstration.
 
Who wants to go first today? Owen, their instructor, asked. A girl in a pink jumpsuit raised her hand. Owen loved picking on the newbies. Now this move is called the jackdrill, he said, picking the jumpsuited girl up by her waist, flipping her upside-down, and grinding her head into the mat on the floor by spinning her around. After a couple seconds he righted and returned her, his voice changing to sincerely apologetic. Are you alright? Was that OK? he said, looking her over. Here, here, let me fix your hair. Oh, no, no, thank you, the girl said, a bit stunned, its fine.
 
When it was time to practice on their own, Sarah got paired up with an outrageously cute and muscular man shed been eying the whole evening. Hey there, she said, extending her arm. Im Sarah. Jonathan, he said, smiling winningly. She felt her heart melt just a little bit. Flipping Jonathan by the waist and watching the muscles on his back ripple, she became determined to ask him out at the end of the lesson.
 
She didnt need to. As he was toweling the sweat off his chest, he approached her. So Sarah, you doing anything tonight? She thought for a second. Jason wanted to talk about some weird work thing hed noticed but she could blow that off for a night. Uh, nope, she answered. Why dont I take you out to dinner? he asked. Sure, thatd be great, she said, smiling.
 
At dinner, she discovered that Jonathan shared her interests. In fact, he also appeared to share her friends interests as well as various other random interests she could think of. On just about any subject he could marshall a stream of facts, with names and dates and places, capped off by a touching personal anecdote or a joke.
 
Erlang: Isnt Erlang fantastic? I just love the way that message-passing unifies both the internal control structure and the intra-process communication. That said, the syntax could use some work I remember one time I showed this Erlang program to a friend and they thought it was Perl!
 
Guitar: Oh, I just think the guitar is a beautiful instrument. I love the way you get lost in the sound when youre playing a Robert Plant solo. I remember one time when I got lost in the sound and didnt find my way out for weeks!
 
Slovenian philosophy: I just cant get enough of iek! I mean, I know a lot of people think using a Lacanian model to question notions of false consciousness runs afoul of modern Popperian scientific sensibility, but at the very least now that the Bayesians have taken up arms against the Popperites theyll be willing to admit theres at least some analytical heft to the Lacanian techniques. God, youre great. I remember this one time when I told a friend that and they just looked at me.
 
Sarah accidentally dropped her napkin on the floor and Jonathan ran over to pick it up for her and she watched his muscles ripple beneath his clothes and fantasized about tearing them off. Hey, my place is just down the street a little. Want to come back for a bit? So they walked, chatting happily, through the Mission and she let him into her apartment and they chatted some more on the couch for a bit, finding odd excuses to move a bit closer to each other and look into each others eyes until Sarah reached out for the kiss and Jonathan followed and pushed her down onto the couch, making out for a while before he began lifting off her shirt.
 
Wayne spent the first load of cash on a fancy new office, the best to give the right impression about the Wayne Darnus Center for User Priorities, of course. Then he hired an attractive assistant for the same reason (and to help him with his soon-to-be-busy schedule).
 
Whats the first order of business? he asked her, once he was settled in his plush new chair behind is imposing new desk. Uh, we dont have any orders of business, she said. OK, well then the first order of business is to think of one.
 
Whats the first order of business? he asked her. To think of a first order of business, she said. Alright, Ill do that and get back to you.
 
Although technically, he added, it will be a second order of business since thinking of it already was the first order of business. Good point, she said, and scurried off.
 
Jason spent the day thinking about the other afternoon he spent with Sarah. Hed come over to work but working led to chatting and chatting led to moving closer and pretty soon the only productive thing he got out of the day was exercise. As soon as he was done with what he was working on that day, he biked as fast as he could to Sarahs house and knocked on the door. Hey there, he said smiling as she opened it. She didnt smile back; she just grabbed him and threw him against the wall, closing the door behind her with her foot. She grabbed his head and pushed it into the wall with her mouth, as he made pleasant-sounding noises. By the time they got into the bathroom, he was only half-clothed.
 
Then there was a knock on the door and they pulled away. Who the fuck is that? Jason asked. Sarah looked at the clock on her dresser. Oh, shoot, Im sorry. Thats probably Jonathan. Jason looked at her for a while, puzzled. She looked back for what seemed like a long moment and then said Oh, you do know Im poly, right?
 
Tomorrow: Chapter Eight
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 15, 2007
 
Dear Bubble City fans: Im sorry for the delay. I got sick and couldnt write. Im going to try to catch up today; well see how far I get.
 
Also, Ive changed Dianes name to Sarah. It just seemed to fit better (although now Im having second thoughts). Ill try to change names around less than Cory Doctorow, but I hope youll forgive one or two. Also, Ive fixed this and some other mistakes in previous entries.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 15, 2007 #
 
Thats some bad poly. She seems to be lacking the communication aspect, which is key to it working.
 
posted by Backspace
 on November 15, 2007 #
 
I figured Id get some complaints about being insufficiently pro-poly. Sorry, it was funnier that way.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 15, 2007 #
 
Haha, I dont mind, there are plenty of people who claim to be poly but go about it in a terrible way. The pain they leave behind reflects poorly on the idea of poly.
 
posted by Backspace
 on November 15, 2007 #
 
Glad to see the story back on track. Ive slightly lost track of the characters from the 8 day break though, hopefully the next chapter will come a little sooner! :)
 
posted by Callum
 on November 16, 2007 #
 
                      
 
posted by aizheng
 on November 21, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 14, 2007
 
Title: Cooling the Mark Out
 
You run into a man at a party. You strike up a conversation. He seems
very friendly. You like him. And then he tells you about some friends he
has. This man is called the roper.
 
The friends tell you about a deal. They know about a gamble, but its
rigged so you cant lose. Just give them some money and theyll show
you. This is called the con.
 
The first time you give them money it works; it comes back ten-fold. But
now youre getting greedy. You want to do it again, bigger this time.
Only this time their money doesnt come back. This is called the loss.
 
You feel like a chump. Your greediness got the best of you. You want to
get back at those con-men. You are called the mark.
 
But the roper talks you down.  You cant go to the police without
admitting that you were trying to commit a crime. And everybody has to
lose sometime, right? It could be worse. This is called cooling out the
mark.
 
Erving Goffman, the great sociologist, noticed this decades ago. Only he
didnt just notice it in con men. Students had to be persuaded to accept
a world far less idealistic than they learned in school.  Kids who
failed the bar exam had to persuade themselves they didnt really want
to be lawyers. People at restaurants had to be persuaded to accept the
screwup by the kitchen. Everyone occasionally needs schooling in the
philosophy of taking a loss.
 
It was this last example that particularly struck me. The other day,  I
was watching a video clip of a motivational speaker. And what did he
talk about? A screwup by a restaurant he went to. And how the host
worked hard, overhard even, to pacify him about it.
 
It was a decent story. It was very well told. But why was a motivational
speaker telling it? But now I realize: it was about cooling out the
mark.
 
Cooling out marks is how institutions persuade people to accept things
they think are wrong. The con-man convinces you getting stolen from is
OK. Your job convinces you its OK that theyre corrupt. The restaurant
persuades you its OK that theyre incompetent.
 
Motivational speakers do the same thing. Did the economy cheat you,
fire you, stick you in some crappy job with a crabby boss? Listen, the
motivational speaker explains, its not the economys fault. And just as
the roper is always separate from the con men, the motivational speaker
doesnt directly work for the economy. He sits on the sidelines, waiting
to cool the mark out.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 14, 2007
 
Have you seen The Sting?
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sting
 
Pretty good movie.
 
posted by David Magda
 on November 15, 2007 #
 
thats cool, I didnt need to read Bubble City every day anyway
 
posted by Mal
 on November 15, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  8, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 6
 
Miller ushered him into a clean, but ancient, little house with leather sofas and bright windows. Take a seat, he said. Can I get you anything? Uh, no thanks, Jason said, a bit surprised at this reception. OK, Im gonna fix myself a drink, Miller said, heading into the kitchen.
 
You know, he said in between noises of liquids mixing and ice crunching, I always knew someday someone would call me to account. Im actually kind of surprised it took so long. He returned and grabbed a chair across from Jason. Alright, so lets do this: I think you have something you want to ask me.
 
Caught a bit off-guard by all the franknessand the prescienceJason began by stuttering. Well, uh, I was looking through the NNA code and, as Im sure you know, well, I mean obviously you know, theres this section in there thats just a series of numbers. S-boxes, you might call them. Miller laughed. Anyway, it appears to me that the S-boxes only affect the results under fairly unusual circumstances  that they seem to be a kind of backdoor allowing someone to remotely control the output of NNA.
 
So you havent found the key yet? No, not yet. That code is impenetrable! Miller laughed. I was hoping you might be able to shed some light. Come on, now. Im sure youre nice, but Im not about to give out the backdoor to NNA to any pretty young thing that happens to come out here and knock on my door. Anyway, even if I wanted to, I couldnt. Yahoo insisted on wiping all my drives after I left the company. I dont have the key anymore.
 
But surely you can reconstruct it? I mean, the code is open source  you can see the backdoor right there. Yes, but it was a sort of public key-style system. Whats in the code is just the public part; anyone can read that. But it was generated from the private key  the series of patterns that will trigger it. Basically, what you see in those S-boxes is just the hash of the private key and it only kicks in if the hash of a voting cluster matches.
 
So whyd you do it? For fun? Of course not. I knew it was wrong. I wasnt gonna pull another Dennis Ritchie. I was ordered to. The folks at Yahoo insisted that if we were going to open source this engine they had to have a way of clearing out illegal and offensive stories; otherwise itd tarnish their good name. Of course, that department disappeared in a reorg shortly after the softwares release and I disappeared along with it, so I suppose its all kind of irrelevant now, except as a historical curiosity.
 
Historical curiosity? Jason shouted, before realizing how loud he was being. Its a major security vulnerability in a key piece of infrastructure! Do you have any idea how bad this is? Yeah, yeah, I suppose technically it is, Miller said, but lets be realistic here. My copy of the key was wiped, everyone at Yahoo who knew about the project is long gone, and there werent many of them to begin with. Its a dead letter.
 
You dont understand, Jason said. Someones using it. I dont know whether they were at Yahoo or whether they got it from someone or whether they figured it out, but its getting used. There are anomalies in the recommendations that just cant be explained any other way. Oh god. What are they doing with it? Well, its difficult to tell without cracking the key. The big piece Ive been able to spot so far is that theyre getting inane videos recommended to everyone. But who knows what else theyre doing.
 
Well, you do. Just change the S-boxes and see what recommendations change. Ah, youre right! I just need to feed it the live input! If I give that to two versions with no randomness and different S-boxes, the difference will have to be exactly the orders from the backdoor. And oh god, and thatll tell me what the key is: I just remove all the pieces of the input that dont affect the difference and whatevers left must be what triggers the backdoor. Thats brilliant! I just need to get my hands on a copy of the live database and some computers. Wow, thanks so much. Glad to help.
 
So youll come forward? Tell the world about the security hole you put in so we can force people to take it out? Miller laughed. Not a chance. But I thought you said  you said you were against it. I am, but look around. See this house? This couch? This cozy little place in the woods. I got to retire early on my Yahoo stock options. And I got those by signing some pretty iron-clad non-disclosure agreements. I talk about any of this in public and I spend the rest of my life in court, watching all of this get taken away. Sorry, kid, but youre on your own on this one.
 
But, but, Jason said. Dont you see how important this is? The integrity of the worlds news is at stake! And you seem like just the one to save it, Miller said. In fact, it seems like you already have your solution all figured out. All I can really say is best of luck to you.
 
But, but, Jason said, exasperated. Well, the very least you can do is walk me through the code. Miller just laughed. That codes gotten so crusty since the last time I touched it. I dont think theres a person on Earth who really understands it anymore. I guess thats why no one else has caught the S-boxes. Everyone knows better than to go near that thing.
 
Anyway, unless you have anything else, Ive got a game of Starcraft that I really should be getting back to, Miller said. Uh, I guess not. Thanks for talking to me about it, I guess. Oh, of course. Sorry I couldnt be more help. But good luck, kid. Youll need it. And with that Miller showed him the door. And Jason found himself standing alone in the middle of a hillside, wondering how a kid like him was going to save the news.
 
When he got back, he quietly made a dump of the Newsflip database and rejiggered his program to try to dissect the live DB instead of generating random ones. He quickly saw much better results. Within hours it had pared things down to just a couple hundred thousand possibilities.
 
While he was waiting, he pored over the diffs hed generated as Miller had suggested: the changes that the backdoor had made to peoples recommendations. The first thing he noticed was that just about everyone was seeing crummy stories: the video of the dog peeing, news about dumb celebrities, that sort of thing. Meanwhile, real news  like the attack on Iran  was completely buried. Only a small handful ever saw it.
 
Jason was shocked. The American people werent being dumb  obsessed with celebrity over politics, with bodily fluids over intellectualism. Thats just what they were being fed. And there was someone out there making sure of that.
 
Jason was bubbling mad  and his anger only increased as he watched the elements tick away on his little script to search for the backdoor  each tick making his blood boil higher. And as it was almost done, the phone rang. It was Sarah.
 
Hey kiddo, she sang. Caught you playin hooky at the office? Whats up? she asked. Oh, not much, Jason lied. Just thought Id work from home today. Oh yeah, I get sick of those slobs too. Hey, want to come over to my place and keep me company? Uh, well, Jason started. Oh, dont worry. Ive got wifi and everything  you can work from here just fine. I promise I wont distract you too much.
 
Jason knew he should stay at home and finish what hed started, but a tingle of excitement ran through his body, telling him he really ought to see Sarah. OK, how about I come over there in twenty minutes? Sounds good, she said, and gave him her address. See you soon! See you, he said, and hung up.
 
By then the computer had cracked the code and he went over to see what was what. It was, as predicted, a bunch of bookmarks, but in some weird series that Jason couldnt quite follow. He tried reproducing it by creating some dummy accounts of his own, but before he could really puzzle things out he realized that hed promised Sarah hed be there ten minutes ago and dropped what he was working on to run for the door.
 
Deep inside the Googleplex, behind a set of keycard-locked doors, behind another set that required keys for entry, behind another set that clearly read NO VISITORS BEYOND THIS POINT, lay a series of employees that, except for the slightly-heightened security, seemed like all the others.
 
Tom was going through his daily rounds of checking on the recommender results when he noticed a certain story was being recommended to him twice. The recommender was programmed to only recommend the same story to someone only once, so that never happened  unless one of his teammates screwed up. Hey Kevin, get over here. You fucked up again. A miffed-looking British fellow headed over to Toms desk. What are you talking about?
 
You fucked up  Im seeing this dog story getting recommended twice. But how can that be? Kevin asked. I put in safeguards to make sure that never happened again. Unreal. Are you sure its not on your end? Of course its not on my end  Im looking at the raw recommendation output. Alright, alright, well trace it back. See which posts are conflicting. OK, give me a second. Here, grab a chair.
 
Whoa, this is weird, Tom said. I dont recognize any of these accounts. Do you? Numbered account names? Wed never be so blatant. Fuck. You know what this means, right? We have an incompetent intern? No, moron, it means someones onto us. Theyve figured out the back door and theyre testing it for themselves. Oh shit. Shit, shit, shit. What do we do? What can we do? We gotta talk to Saul.
 
They headed over to a slightly larger cubicle hidden in a corner. Saul, weve got a situation here. Situation? Saul asked. What is this? Some kind of spy movie? Whatre you talking about? Someone else has found the backdoor. We spotted a bunch of bookmarks in the same pattern as were using from a different set of accounts. Fuck. OK, well, thanks for telling me.
 
Heres what I want you to do. Youre going to walk calmly back to your desks. Youre going to write up everything youve learned so far and place it on this Flash drive. He removed a small USB keyfob from inside his desk. Youre then going to give me the keyfob, wipe everything related from your machines, and pretend this never ever happened, you understand? This is out of your hands now. Im going to make sure this gets taken care of. Tom and Kevins eyes widened. Wait, Tom said, you dont mean Exactly, Saul replied. This is a job for public relations.
 
Tomorrow: Chapter Seven
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  8, 2007
 
This is a job for public relations.
 
Hahaha, thats hilarious! :)
 
posted by Callum
 on November  8, 2007 #
 
Hey, where is chapter 7?
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on November 11, 2007 #
 
Still waiting for chapter 7
 
posted by William Andregg
 on November 14, 2007 #
 
Just wanted to say that Im really enjoying this series! Cant wait till the next installment
 
posted by Terry McCall
 on November 14, 2007 #
 
A week later and still no chapter 7 What happened? You had me hooked already! :)
 
posted by Callum
 on November 15, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  6, 2007
 
Title: GPhone Announced, Morons
 
Several years ago, the key members of the team at Danger, then the leading phone OS development firm (they made the Hiptop, called the Sidekick in the US), left to start a new company called Android, which was shortly thereafter acquired by Google. The folks at Android were not shy at what they were up to. One founder, who was in Boston at the same time I was, stated it clearly: they were creating an open OS for phones. When asked what the point of this was, he suddenly got very vague.
 
A couple years later Apple released the iPhone and what was now a Google division started rounding up partners for the Android OS. The press got wind of it and went crazy. Google was making a phone  a GPhone! How could Apple compete? What fancy gadgets did it have? Would Google take control of the cell phone industry too?
 
And today, Google announced what they were doing: the same thing they were always doing, the same thing Android had been doing since day one. Theyre making an open OS for phones.
 
The only announcement today is of their new Open Handset Alliance, which I cant help but feel is a jab at the Open Content Alliance (which Google pointedly refuses to join). Google has certainly put their clout behind the team at Android and gotten an impressive number of people to sign up to support their little OS. But lets not let the press buzz get out of hand. Google isnt coming out with a phone, theyre releasing an open phone operating system. When asked what the point of this is, they suddenly get very vague. Just like always.
 
I certainly cant imagine that having an open phone OS is a bad thing and Im glad such talented people are working on it and I hope its good and gets widely adopted, so I can get an even nicer Sidekick cheaply. But, jeez people, lets not blow this out of proportion. Its just a bunch of open source software.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  6, 2007
 
Its more vaporware than OSS, and is being promoted with statements like Because these innovations and differentiated features can be kept proprietary, manufacturers and mobile operators are protected from the viral infection problem often associated with other licenses.
 
Plus, OpenMoko hardware actually exists, was available for developers months ago and will ship by the end of the year.
 
posted by James
 on November  6, 2007 #
 
GNU/Linux is /just/ software too.
 
Look how /that/ changed the world.
 
posted by Noah Slater
 on November  6, 2007 #
 
Yes, but I dont think anyone predicted that in advance. When Linus Torvalds announced the first release, geeks liked it but it didnt get tabloid-style coverage. It took decades of hard work to make it into something generally useful. The same could be true of Android; declaring victory today is premature.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November  6, 2007 #
 
Touch.
 
posted by Noah Slater
 on November  6, 2007 #
 
Actually, the Open Handset Alliance sounds like the Open Mobile Alliance.
 
Although the Android OS might create emulation on the mobile market, I dont like the idea that Google is the center of this movement.
 
They bring great developers, their trademark and their logo, but they are also outsourcing the development of applications while potentially getting the ads revenue.
 
Moreover, this move continues to fragment the Mobile Linux development as this post discusses.
 
Perhaps Android will create an interesting ecosystem and I hope there will a fork with no trace of Google ; otherwise, Ill prefer Maemo or ideally Ubuntu Mobile with a Nokia device.
 
posted by kael
 on November  7, 2007 #
 
First, I dont understand who you are calling morons in the title and why you think thats useful here.
 
Second, I dont understand why just because Google announced that they are building an OS, everyone assumes that this means that they are not also planning on building a phone.
 
posted by mako
 on November  7, 2007 #
 
Im not sure how you can compare Linux and Android. When Linus announced the first release, it was being developed solely by a Finnish university student as a hobby. Android is supported by a $200 billion corporation.
 
posted by Steve
 on November  7, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  6, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 5
 
Stare. Stare. Tick. Tick. Ancient art hung on the walls. Ancient books
lined the shelves. The light fixtures looked like they hadnt been
dusted since Carter urged Americans to save electricity. So, how are
things at the new offices? a wisened-looking old man sitting at the
other end of the table asked. Oh, fine, Grandpa, Jason replied.
What is it you guys do again? Videos of models doing backflips?
No, Jason said with a sigh. Were a news site. You mean like the
New York Times? Kind of, except we dont write the news, we just try
to find bits of it for you. How do you do that? Well, we look at
everything people on the Internet are reading and talking about and
then we try to pick out which of those people are most like you and
tell you about the stories they like at the moment. I see, the old
man said. I see.
 
So how well does it work? Well, uh, not so great, actually. Thats
what Ive been investigating lately. What do you mean? Well, it
seems like the site is recommending everyone the same inane stuff,
like stupid videos and that sort of thing. Ah, yes. Well, hate to
say I told you so, but this is just like that article i was reading
inwhat was it? Foreign Affairs?predicted. What do you mean?
It said that in the future wed have this personal newspaper all you
tech wizards have been promising us, only itd recommend us the same
stupid crap (pardon my language) that average people have been
enjoying for centuries.
 
Really? Jason asked, suspicious. Do you happen to have the
article? Oh yes, its right over the old man stood up to get it
but then remembered he had broken his knee, the ostensible reason for
Jasons visit, and thought better of it. Its right over therecould
you fetch it for me? Oh, of course, Jason said. He pulled it down
and flipped through it.
 
It was by the former editor of the New York Times and made the usual
viritolic case for trusting human editors over some algorithm based on
the whims of random people. And somehow it found a way to compare news
recommenders to street vomit, which Jason had to admit was a
depressingly common sight in San Francisco. Jason briefly wondered if
the old media was using the backdoor to prop up their dying business
models, but quickly decided nobody at those companies was clued-in
enough to know what a backdoor was.
 
Yes, yes, Ive heard all this, Grandfather, but I just dont buy it.
Oh, whats your explanation? Just need to improve the technology, eh?
Because Ive heard that one more than a few times. No, I think
someone is trying to manipulate the results. What? Oh, god, you
young people are always jumping to conspiracy theories. Why cant you
just admit your precious little system doesnt work? Why do you have
to create some shadowy cabal of people trying to control the news.
Jason just sighed. Lets talk about something else.
 
Whats your shirt say? Daring Fireball? Whats that?
 
Wayne quickly found that, although Google didnt want their name on
the check or the web site, they were most accommodating in other
matters. They gave him a nice little office inside the Googleplex, let
him play with all the fancy equipment and company perks (free laundry,
free swimming pool, free video games), and had a stream of people
coming by to chat him up and suggest new ideas for promoting NNA.
 
He was a bit wary of getting so close to someone he had so often
railed against, but he thought that perhaps this was his reward for
his ceaseless railing. Anyway, there were a lot of other evils out
there to fight, and if working with Google made him more effective at
fighting those, wasnt it, on balance, a good thing? And the free food
was nice too.
 
On the plane back, Jason tried to figure out the meaning of the
S-boxes. He spent the first couple hours tracing the code, trying to
understand how it worked and how the S-boxes were used, before finally
giving up in frustration. It was just too complicated.
 
So, being a programmer, he decided to try a more automated approach.
First, he took NNA and replaced its random number generating system
with a function that always returned the number 17 (17 was a pretty
random number, right?). Then he made a copy in which the only thing he
changed was the S-boxes. He then wrote a program to generate random
input files for the recommender. It fed the same file to both
recommenders  the normal one and the one with the modified S-boxes
 and it looked at the output to see if there were any differences.
Since hed taken all the randomness out of the algorithm, any
difference in output had to be due to the one thing that had changed:
the S-boxes. In other words, the program would search for inputs that
triggered the S-boxes.
 
There was just one problem: there were a lot of possible inputs. For
the rest of the plane ride, his program tried thousands and thousands
of inputs, but none of them showed any difference. When the plane
landed, he slipped his laptop in his bag and let it keep crunching,
but he knew hed have to try a different tack.
 
Wayne Darnus told everyone who would listen that he had invented NNA,
but as far as Jason could tell, he was using invented in the most
loosest of senses. Digging back through the changelog on the NNA
source code, which was provided for free to all from a project on
SourceForge, he found the code was originally written by some
programmer at Yahoo, back when Yahoo had real programmers. Getting a
name was near impossible  Yahoo had apparently insisted that all its
programmers contribute under the name A Yahoo! Some boneheaded
corporate consistency policy, no doubt.
 
But the author must have given up his identity somewhere. Then it
hit him: mailing lists. No programmer worth their salt could give up a
good mailing list flamewar. Whoever wrote NNA must have shown up on a
mailing list once or twice to defend it. Finding him would be easy:
all Jason had to do was read through ten or twenty thousand messages
arguing about the minutiae of NNAs design principles.
 
After trawling through interminable debates in mailing list archives,
for what felt like days, Jason finally found a post from a man whos
patronizingly knowledgeable tone unmistakably indicated that he was the
one who wrote it all. And the message was posted from home, so his
computer had no qualms about signing his name. There it was in black
and white, the man who had started it all: Dan Miller.
 
Dan Miller was a rather elusive party. He had no website or home page
and despite NNAs incredible popularity, hed apparently never been
interviewed by the press. (Wayne had been interviewed endlessly, of
course. Whenever someone neglected to include him in their
history books, he complained about their lack of commitment to
historical accuracy on his vlogcast.) Jason wasnt too surprised,
though. Finding MIller hadnt been easy, and he hadnt known many
journalists who were willing to do much work to get a technology
story.
 
Millers entry in the Yahoo corporate directory had long since gone
stale  hed left years ago  and emails to his personal account
bounced with the message Mailbox full.  overflowing with spam,
presumably.
 
He just couldnt get a handle on this guy. So he called Eric. Oh,
yeah, Miller. Wow, theres a name I hadnt heard in a long time. So
you think he might be your source into cracking this NNA thing?
Seems like its worth a shot, Jason replied. Yeah, I suppose it
does. Alright, then, well, I guess Ill look this up for you. What are
we searching for? OK, here we go: Daniel Miller, last known employer
Yahoo. Uhhh, OK, he lives in Mill Valley, Ill email you his address.
Wow, Eric, thats incredible. Thanks so much. No trouble; its
always nice to have an excuse to use these skills.
 
Marin County wasnt exactly known for its comprehensive public
transport system, so Jason hopped a cab, which deposited him someplace
random in the middle of a hillside. He climbed around for a while
looking for the house he knew must be nestled in it somewhere, before
finally locating the place. He navigated his way to the entrance, then
knocked politely on the door.
 
He wondered how a software developer could live in a place like this
 isolated from the rest of the Valley, away from the buzz and
excitement of the industry. But then again, he wondered how a software
developer could live without having a website. Maybe Miller wasnt
much of a software developer.
 
A man in a beard who looked to be about in his late fifties answered the
door. Hello? he said, apparently unaccustomed to receiving visitors.
Dan Miller? Yup. Hey there, I was looking into NNAs source code
and I have a few questions. I know you probably hate to be bugged
about software you wrote over a decade ago, but I came all the way out
here and Id really appreciate just a bit of your time to answer just
a question or two about NNA.
 
Miller smiled knowingly and gave Jason a long, piercing gaze. ah,
yes, he said at last. Ive been expecting you.
 
Tomorrow: Chapter Six
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  6, 2007
 
Loving the story.  Keep up the good work.
 
posted by nzljim
 on November  6, 2007 #
 
Starting to get exciting!
 
I know youre expecting errors, but just in case you want to edit it at some point: Waynes last name switched from Darnus to Durdis around chapter 4.
 
posted by Erik
 on November  6, 2007 #
 
This is good stuff :)
 
posted by Aarjav
 on November  7, 2007 #
 
Great story so far, but you seem to be lacking restraint in teasing your readers. The pace of the story has really picked up as compared to the beginning. Not that I mind ;~)
 
posted by Andrew
 on January 16, 2009 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  6, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 4
 
Hows it going, kiddo? Theyd already gotten to kiddo? Jason tried to blend in with his chair. Helllo, kiddo? You in there? Trent slapped him on the back of the head. Jason felt a sharp pain and decided to give up on the ruse. Uh, yes, sir. Or at least I have been for the past couple decades. Ahh, a kidder. Love that.
 
Anyway, just wanted to check in, see how you were doing, all that good boss stuff, you know? Ah, of course, sir. Everythings going great. The, uh, other team membershe looked at Sarahhave been really helpful and, uh, yeah, just everything is going really well, I guess. Glad to hear it, Trent said.
 
You know, Trent said, before pausing a moment to look around Jasons desk, uh, Jason, that Newsflip isnt just another one of those startups out to make a quick buck. We have a noble mission. For decades, people have gotten their news from a handful of conglomerates whove bought each other up so many times that they cant tell their CEO from their HR department. And news is important. Without the news, you wouldnt have any idea who won the latest sports game or why were invading Iran. Were invading Iran again? Jason asked. Anyway, I just want you to know that this is a company that makes a difference. I see, so were a company thats out for a quick buck while thinking were helping the world. Exactly, Trent said. Anyway, Ive got another dozen meetings, so I better head off, but just give me a ring if you need me. Of course, Jason said.
 
Jason went back to his screen and decided to actually read through Newsflip to see this great new democratizing force, telling people about the reasons we were invading Iran. The top 5? Waking Up During Surgery, Its Official: Tom Cruise Has Sucked the Life out of Katie Holmes, Excited Pug Pees on Cameraman, 5 Stupid Things You Said to Her, and Can Medical Marijuana Cost You Your Kid? Jason sighed.
 
Jason thought of himself as a rather sophisticated person, but
Newsflips recommender certainly didnt seem to think so. He wondered
how many other people got the same sort of treatment. So he opened up
a raw connection to the database and did a query. Tens of thousands of
people were seeing the story about dogs peeing. Odd, he thought.
 
He needed someone to bounce things off of, so he called the best
person he knew for that sort of thing: Eric. Eric was brilliant. In
the first bubble, hed made millions as a teenager whod managed to
persuade some VCs to let him run a web news company. But the
experience had burned him out badly and now he mostly slunk around his
apartment in San Francisco and watched TV. Still, he knew this stuff
better than anyone. Jason gave him a call.
 
Hey, Eric, you got a moment? Yeah, not like Im doing anything
else. You ever read Newsflip? Look, Jason, I love you and all, but
Im not going to start using some website just because you work there.
The news is a complete waste of ti Yeah, yeah, I know. I read your
blog, dude. Really? I didnt think anyone did. Oh, geez, youre
the topanyway, can you just go there for a minute and point it at
your del.icio.us page to generate some recommendations. Yeah, uh,
OK. Jason heard some sounds of typing and sighing thru the phone.
Alright, here we go: 25 stories. Yeah, this stuff is total crap. Dogs
peeing on people and that sort of thing.
 
OK, now Jason was suspicious. Eric was just about the last person on
Earth who ought to be recommended that story. God, Jason. What do you
train this thing with? Its terrible. What the hell algorithm is it
running anyway? Thats what Im trying to figure out. Mind if I
swing by your place? Not really; you might, though. See you in
fifteen.
 
Jason packed up his laptop, ran down the stairs, and biked over to
Erics apartment in the Western Addition. Eric answered the door
almost before Jason had knocked. Inside was a den of total filth:
clothes strewn everywhere, pizza boxes piled high, no outside light
coming in, and little inside light turned on. Jason hugged the wall to
make sure he didnt run into anything. Take a seat on the couch,
Eric said, gesturing to a pile of crap in the corner. Jason tried to
dig through it to clear a space big enough for his butt.
 
OK, so Ive got the code on here that generates this stuff. Mind
looking thru it on here with me? Yeah, why not? Eric said, clearing
off a similar space for himself. Maybe its a bug in the renderer;
its rendering the same recommendations for everyone. Nah, cant be
 the recommendations are actually in the database. Theyre
definitely getting spit out by the recommender.
 
Well, is the recommender just generating the same stuff for
everyone? Nah, cant be. People would have noticed that. People
are more alike than youd expect. Check. So Jason ran a few queries
to see. Nope, theres definitely variance in what people are getting
recommended.
 
Hmm, Eric said. Well, maybe the recommender youre using just
sucks. No way, Jason said. Were using NNA. Its state of the art.
All the big guys use it  Google News, Yahoo, even the new NYTimes
redesign. Eric laughed. State of the art? That piece of cruft hasnt
been touched since the Bad Old Days. Isnt there some new thing
everyone is switching to? I dont know; you obviously follow this
stuff more than I do.
 
So why dont you just upgrade it to the new stuff. Yeah, I guess
thats a good idea. Ill talk to the guys, he said. Oh wait  I
just remembered. We tried that and Wayne Darnis threw this total
shitstorm. You should have seen the place  it was crazy. No way
theyre doing that again.
 
Well, lets open up NNA and take a look at it, Eric suggested. Im
sure its a morass, but I cant think of anything else to do. Fine,
said Jason, pulling it up. Eric was right. They scrolled through it,
but couldnt make heads or tails of it. Things had been patched and
repatched so many times that it might as well have been written in
INTERCAL. But Jason scrolled thru it as best he can, trying to see if
he could see something.
 
Wait! Eric shouted. Go back. What the hell is that? Eric pointed
to a block of numbers on the screen, sticking out from the rest of the
program like a sore thumb. I dunno, I assumed it was just some
constants, Jason said defensively. Who the hell has a page of
one-byte constants in the middle of their program?
 
Eric looked closer. Oh my god, these arent constants. These are
S-boxes! Huh? Jason said. S-boxes! You never heard about those?
No, Jason said, again annoyed at Erics habit of assuming everyone
had his encyclopedic knowledge for odd details. Back in the bad old
days of encryption, IBM or someone came up with this algorithm called
DES  Data Encryption Standard.
 
NIST, the government standards body, ratified it and it went on to be
the standard encryption algorithm used in banks and computers and all
that stuff. But right before the government ratified it, they sent it
to the NSA  you know, the spy organization that hires up all the top
math students to break encryption algorithms so they can better tap
everyones phones  for final approval.
 
The NSA said they liked it but they just had one little change. And
they fiddled with these things called the S-boxes  big lists of
numbers that your message was run through as it was encrypted. The NSA
claimed they just were helping make sure the S-boxes were as secure as
possible, but they never explained how or why they picked the numbers
they did. So, although its never been proven, a lot of people assume
the S-boxes are the NSAs backdoor into the private conversations of
DES users  that theres something about the S-boxes that makes it
easy for them to decrypt peoples messages.
 
What are you saying, Eric? That someone put a backdoor into NNA?
Hey, Im not saying anything. I mean, Im sure there were perfectly
good reasons that DES needed S-boxes; its just that the NSA got to
choose them that was suspicious. Maybe the same thing is true with
NNA; maybe theres some good reason it needs S-boxes, although nothing
springs to mind.
 
But how would a backdoor in this program even work? It doesnt talk
to the network; it just gets stories in and pushes recommendations
out. Am I supposed to believe that buried within these numbers are
some secret rules to always elevate stories about dogs peeing?
 
No, of course not, Eric said. Think about it: its the perfect
system. The recommender doesnt talk to the network itself, of course,
but it gets fed tons of data from crawlers which, all the time, are
scouring the Net for various pages and dumping some facts about them
into the recommender. The recommender could just keep an eye out for
page patterns which match the S-boxes and use those as its
instructions.
 
God, youre right! Thats brilliant. And it would be almost
impossible to trace, because any one of a million pages on the Web
could have set it off. Precisely, Eric said. So youre saying some
guy out has a series of pages that encode secret orders, telling all
the worlds news sites to feature stories about dogs peeing? No, no,
no, not at all. That would be irresponsible. Im just saying its
possible. Eric paused. Anyway, he continued, if he was smart it
wouldnt be a series of pages  thats too traceable. Hed just use
Tor or some sort of anonymizing proxy to send the messages by voting
through some dummy account on del.icio.us or something like that. Itd
be impossible to trace.
 
This is all just speculation, of course. We have no more evidence of
it than a bunch of funny numbers in a poorly-written computer
program, Eric quickly added. Yes, but its so perfectso devilishly
clever. Hey, hang on a minute. My phones ringing. Jason didnt
realize how oppressive Erics apartment was until he left the heavy
putrid air to answer the phone outside. Hello? he said. Jason, you
need to come home, said the man on the other end of the line.
 
Tomorrow: Chapter Five
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  6, 2007
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  3, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 3
 
The next day was a Saturday but by the following Monday things had calmed down and Jason could finally begin real work.
 
He began, as he always did, by trying to figure out the system. You couldnt really work on something until you really grokked it: understood all the pieces and how they interacted and why they were there. If you didnt get that, then you could spend days trying to fix one piece, only to discover all your effort was wasted because your fixes would be ineffective as long as another part was in place.
 
He first checked out a copy of the code, staring at the list of thousands of files on his screen, trying to figure out where to start. As usual, nobody had bothered to write down anything explaining things. So he began opening pieces up, finding that they referenced other sections and bouncing from section to section until the big picture became clearer.
 
By the end of the day, he felt he had a pretty solid understanding of how the whole thing worked. Not how people thought it worked, but how it actually did  what the code that actually ran the system said.
 
What the hell were they thinking? Sarah thought, as she sat staring at yet another of the braindead interfaces the programmers had come up with. She knew they had no contact with other humans but honestly sometimes she didnt understand why they couldnt even figure out basic principles of decent design.
 
She started, as she always did, by trying to figure out the system. She looked at the various pieces of the interface and tried to figure out the different concepts they were manipulating. Programmers always thought of it in terms of how the system was built, but the users had no idea how the system was built and couldnt cares.
 
You had to think of it from their perspective: what was it they wanted to do, what were the things they encountered along the way, and how could you make sure they felt like they were in control of those things?
 
And then, once you figured all that out, how did you beat it through the heads of the programmers?
 
Trents calendar warned him of an impending VC meeting. Running an office like this  servers, employees, big looming screens overhead  wasnt cheap. And since the site didnt run ads or have a revenue stream, the only way to keep the lights on was to trot back to the VCs every six months with some impressive charts and some pleas for cash.
 
He looked through the names of the people he was meeting with and then jumped over to scan their blogs. To pitch to people you really had to understand them. Figure out what made them tick. Everyone required a different pitch and Trent knew exactly how to reshape it for them, just as Newsflip reshaped a series of links to meet the readers desires.
 
He remembered what companies theyd previously invested on, which ones had done well, what theyd mentioned their kids were into, what gadgets they enjoyed, and  most importantly  how Trent had cut them favors in the past. This town ran on that sort of thing.
 
High above the Newsflip offices loomed a series of big screens with a rapidly-scrolling list of links. The lists were generated by a series of crawlers which ran, 24/7, around various weblogs and social bookmarking sites. Every time someone posted a new link to their blog, or bookmarked something on del.icio.us, or voted for it on Digg, it saw it and noted it. 
Then another program took these triples (jon, del.icio.us bookmarked, lessig.org) and scoured them for patterns. Were a group of people all bookmarking lessig.org today? Are a dozen blogs all linking to a particular YouTube video?
 
It then used these patterns to cluster users into groups. Jon, Jim, and Jill all like YouTube videos about cats. Sal, Sue, and Sam all like newspaper articles about copyright.
 
And that way, when it saw a new YouTube video about cats, or a new newspaper article about copyright, it could make a guess at who would like it. And that combination of guesses made up the Newsflip front page.
 
When you visited Newsflip for the first time, itd show you a bunch of things that were widely liked by different groups of people. Maybe the top link today about music and sports and technology and business. And when you clicked the one you liked the most  lets say music  itd show you ten more stories from the various subgroups of music. In just a couple clicks  music, pop, indie, guitar-based  itd have you figured out and know a great deal more about which kind of links to send your way.
 
From then on, every time you visited the site it would use this knowledge to send you links it thought you might like. It would also show you a few random popular links as well, just to make sure it wasnt missing out on any other odd tastes you had. So every time you visited Newsflip it served you up a couple dozen stories it thought that you would like. (Of course, it also noted down which stories you clicked on and said you liked, right along with the links and bookmarks.)
 
At the heart of it was the pattern-finding system that noticed when groups of people seemed to be doing something. It was based on a system called Notated News Analysis (NNA) which had been invented ages ago by some old guy who turned it into a public standard. Now dozens of sites, including Newsflip, used it to try to generate the best recommendations about what to see on the Internet.
 
Samuel scrolled through his notes one last time before the meeting. Soon people would be filing into the conference room and he couldnt afford to seem unprepared in front of them. He visualized himself standing in front of the room, walking through the bullet points, smoothly ordering the meeting, parrying questions, parceling out action items, dodging barbs. He was ready.
 
People filed in, pulled out their laptops, and engaged in the pre-meeting chit-chat; the final moment of levity before the meetings dreadfully boring waste of time. Finally, he tapped on the table for order.
 
Hey everyone, welcome back to the monday morning evangelism team coordination meeting. As usual, well go around the table and have each team bring us up to date on their activities. Ill start.
 
So this week I gave a keynote at OSCON and encouraged developers to use Google Platform to host their apps. My main points were: 1) that this was a new era of openness here at Google, where we were handing control of our computers to the community; 2) that we had by far the most powerful and scalable system for deployment; and 3) that we were always on the lookout for the developers of the next hot application and that users of Google Platform would be fast-tracked with the acquisition team.
 
Alright, HR?
 
So this week we did a booth at the Ubuntu conference. These things continue to be an amazing value for us. The booth costs a pittance, we managed to snag four top developers out of it (gave them the usual bullshit about the Googs commitment to open source), and we lined them up in job slots that are definitely going to take them out of the open source world for a while.
 
Great work! Standards?
 
Well, the big news continues to be NNA. Newsflip, a small startup up in San Francisco, was trying to switch away from it but, of all things, Wayne Darnus turned the firehose on them and managed to talk them out of it. So now
 
Wait, Wayne Darnus? Yup! Whats his angle? Well, you know, he says he invented NNA so anything that takes attention away from it just makes him less important. Samuel broke out laughing. Oh god, thats perfect. So what did he do? Oh, you know, the usual. Did a piece on how he was oh-so-concerned about all the poor users who would be hurt by the switch. Samuel couldnt stop giggling. Oh my god, he said. This is just too perfect. Yeah, the guys basically doing our job for us.
 
Yeah, exactly. Hey, that gives me an idea. Do you have Waynes number? His phone number? Yeah. Uh, sure, Ive got it here somewhere. OK, 510-555-2414. Samuel picked up the phone and dialed it, repeating the numbers back as he did. He made a shushing sound and set it on speakerphone.
 
Hello? came the gruff voice at the other end. Wayne! Good to hear you. Hey, this is Samuel Boxton over at Google Evangelism. Google? Hey, I didnt say anything about Google on todays show. That stuff I said wasnt targeted you at all.
 
No, no, Wayne, Im not calling to complain; Im calling to congratulate. Congratulate? Congratulate what? Congratulate you, silly. On the great job you did with Newsflip. That was a real act of generous diplomacy you did there. Oh, uh, well, I guess it was. Thanks. But why does Google care about something like that?
 
Dont be silly, Wayne. At Google were just like you  looking out for the users. Trying to make the best Web experience for everyone. Were really 100% on the same page there. Um, yeah then, I suppose we are. You know, its a shame that weve never managed to collaborate before. Our interests are so aligned that it would really be great if we could figure out some way to work together. What do you mean? Do you have some kind of joint project in mind?
 
No, not exactly, Wayne. I was thinking more some kind of funding arrangement. Funding arrangement, Wayne repeated. Yes. Now hear me out: what if we funded The Wayne Darnus Center for User Priorities? The Wayne Darnus Center for User Priorities. I like the sound of that. I thought you would. Now well give you a startup grant to help you establish and operate the center, which will keep on doing the good work youre doing to promote NNA. Um, OK. To start with, I was thinking of an initial grant of around three million dollars. Wayne coughed suddenly but soon regained his composure. Um, yes, well, I think that should be able to cover our initial operations.
 
Perfect. Theres just one more catch. Oh, Wayne said, his voice falling a bit. What? Well, here at Google we dont want to make a big show about how were helping the Web. So its essential our donation remain anonymous. Anonymous? Yeah, you know how whenever you go to a museum or something like that it always says Generous donations by anonymous? Thats just how it works in philanthropy. Oh, I see, Wayne said.
 
So well be doing it exactly like that. The actual money will be donated to you by a shell corporation called Rinaldi Tile, Inc. which we use for these kinds of special projects and well have you sign a confidentiality agreement prohibiting you from disclosing the real source. You know, all the usual stuff. Uh huh, Wayne said, a bit skeptically. And then well send you the three million dollars. Sounds great! Wayne said quickly Where do I sign? Ill have my assistant send over the papers in just a little bit. Perfect. Been a pleasure working with you. See you later. Bye.
 
Samuel hung up the phone and saw smiling faces around the conference table. He smiled back and got up to take a mock bow. The room applauded.
 
Tomorrow: Chapter Four
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  3, 2007
 
I think the novel really picked up at the Google point. For the first time theres a sense of suspense, interest, whats going to happen next, is this a conspiracy, is it based on reality, etc, etc. I think Id have given up on the novel by now otherwise.
 
So far its been all character descriptions, setting the plot, laying out the foundations, but now Im hooked, now I want to know whats going to happen. Previously, I was curious about the characters, but ultimately not that bothered.
 
I might start writing myself, I was at a NaNoWriMo meeting last night :)
 
posted by Callum
 on November  4, 2007 #
 
Im enjoying it so far.
 
Typo: He begun > He began.  (Unless begun as a
simple past form is actually in your dialect.  It wasnt in
either of the dictionaries I checked.)
 
posted by Aaron Brown
 on November  4, 2007 #
 
I like the novel.  Keep it up!
 
posted by Larry
 on November  5, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  2, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 2
 
Downtown San Francisco is a world of carefully-gridded streets and
looming skyscrapers, but hidden behind a gas station on Third is a place
that almost looks like another world. The sun shines brightly upon a
park with green grass and tall shady trees and vibrant swings with
children. The park is an oval and the perimeter is lined with small,
pastel-colored buildings. Here and there are a smattering of small cafes
and restaurants. And the other buildings are filled with startups.
Twitter here. Adaptive Path there. Even Yahoo, when it wanted to
encourage its employees to be more startup-y, opened up an office in the
neighborhood. Sit on the grass and chances are youll sit near a friend
from another company or bump into them in line at a cafe. The place
crawls with companies and back on the street, surveying the scene with a
distant but watchful eye, lie the journalists, whose publications cover
with awe the rumblings of those below. It was here that Newsflip made
its home.
 
Jason entered the building expecting to be greeted warmly by the
relaxed startup world. Instead, the scene he entered was utter chaos.
Get me CNN! shouted a man at the front of the room, apparently to no
one in particular. Others buzzed at their desks, shouting to one another, shouting at their phones, shouting at their computers, shouting at their coffee mugs. One guy just seemed to keep spinning around in his chair for no reason in particular.
 
Jason stood around surveying the scene for a moment until a man standing up motioned for him to come over. What do you mean we cant get CNN? he shouted into his phone. This is America. He placed his hand over the phone and looked down. You must be Jason, he said. Uh, yes, sir. Are you Goddamn it, I dont care if you have to buy it, I want a 5 minute segment on Wolf Blitzer. He covered the phone again. Its great to have you on the team, son. Jason thought this was a bit fast to be adopted as a son, but didnt feel like he could press the point.
 
Look I dont have time for this shit, he suddenly barked. Just get me on CNN. He slammed the phone down, sat down on the side of the desk, and adopted an avuncular tone. Let me tell you a little story, he said. Uh, OK, Jason said, but the man talked right over him.
 
One day, not long after I graduated college, I was waiting at a bus stop. And sitting there on the seat beside me was a magazine, opened to an article about a newspaper. So I read the article and it just took my breath away. Took my breath away. And I said to myself, Self, one day youre going to be running a newspaper like that. Well, it took me twenty years to do it, but here I am. Sure, technically we dont use paper, but we print news all the same, right? Anyway, isnt that amazing?
 
Jason just smiled and nodded.
 
Of course, I didnt get there just by sitting back and watching. No, sir. I got there by joining someone elses startup, seeing how it was done, and then using what Id learned to turn around and start a new company to destroy their main product. Heh, heh. Well, I guess what Im saying is that I better keep an eye out on you. Better keep an eye out on you.
 
Jason looked a bit worried. And puzzled.
 
Anyway, as you can see things are a bit crazy around here. He waved his arm past the still-chaotic room. So I better get back to work. But Im sure youll settle in fine  and if theres any trouble you just let me know. Good luck! he added and then picked up the phone again and started screaming without even dialing.
 
Looking for his desk, Jason wandered around the office for a bit, past the spinning, screaming, slacking employees, until he found an unused desk over in a corner. There was a memo on it, addressed to him, reminding him of the companys copyright and confidentiality commitments that hed signed, which he promptly tossed in the trash.
 
He sat down and began inventorying the other contents of the desk: a flat screen monitor, a dual-processor tower, an IP phone, a keyboard, a mo. He noticed a tugging at his leg and looked down. He sprang back. There was a girl beneath his desk. Sssssssh! she whispered and motioned for him to come towards her. Slowly and awkwardly, he crouched down and crawled towards the girl. She pulled him under the desk with her and extended her hand.
 
Hi, Im Sarah, she said. He shook it. Hi, Im, uh, Jason. Hey, Jason! Welcome aboard the team. So, why are we down here? Because its crazy up there, silly. Why get involved in all that screaming mess when we can just slip off in the storm and hang out by ourselves? I guess. Whats all the fuss about, though? Oh, just some tech pissing contest. Some blowhard with a webcam doesnt like some tech decision some intern made and now everybodys going DEFCON 5. Actually, DEFCON 5 is the lowest level of military activation. I think you probably mean DEFCON 3. She just looked at him. He looked back and realized he should probably shut up.
 
So Sarah, what do you do here? he ventured. Im in charge of training newbies, silly, she said, and ruffled his hair. Catch me if you can! she added, before darting out from under the desk and running across the office. Jason followed in pursuit.
 
She ran to the middle of the roll of desks, then crouched down and rolled under one of them to the next row. Jason kept running to the end of the row to try to head her off at the pass, doing his best to dodge the spinning chairs and thrown balls that were filling the office. Sarah made a bee-line for the door, stopping only to grab the skateboard lying next to it, which she used to skitter down the stairwell. Jason hopped the whole flight after her.
 
Reaching the bottom, she sped out the door just as an overweight man was opening it to enter. He jumped out of the way and screwed up his face in anger. Dont you know who I am? he shouted down the street at her. Nope, replied Jason, running out the door after her.
 
On the street, she skateboarded around baby strollers, old people, and dazed-looking hipsters like a pro, while Jason was jogging as fast as he could just to keep up. She jumped lights right before traffic, took bizarre shortcuts and side-streets, and occasionally turned back to laugh at him. After a couple blocks of this she jumped up onto a railing and headed into a park. The next thing Jason knew she was halfway up a tree in the middle of a park surrounded by shopping malls and people. Jason hadnt come this far just to give up at a tree, so he scurried up afterwards, finding himself balanced precariously on a branch. Once again he found himself in a secluded spot surrounded by people, sitting alone, facing Sarah.
 
Not bad, kid, she said.
 
Wayne ambled in and pressed the button for the elevator. Once he got to the office Trent spotted him at the door and, screaming a few last words into his phone before slamming it down, headed over and led Wayne into a conference room. The office got silent as he walked by. Fans!, he thought.
 
Trent shut the door behind him. Wayne, Wayne, Wayne, so good to see you! Good to see you too, Trent! Whats it been? A couple years? Yeah, must have been that ETech two years ago. The one with that Bezos keynote. Wayne laughed. How could I forget?
 
Anyway, as Im sure you know I invited you here because we were all very hurt by your comments on your show yesterday. Oh, that silly thing? Well I certainly hope no one was too offended. I was just sharing some concerns I had with the changes you were making. Thats all. If you had concerns you should have just taken them to us. My door is always open to you. You know that.
 
Wayne looked at him. Actually, I dont. Lets be frank here. If I try to get an appointment with any startup in this city they push me off on the calendar and jerk me around until three months have gone by and theyve closed their B round of funding and the VCs have hired a professional public relations team to professionally sit and ignore comments from people like me. But if I talk about it on my show I get ushered into your conference room the next morning. So lets not play dumb here. You know as well as I how this game works.
 
Wayne, Wayne, Wayne, trent said shaking his head. What do you want? Do you want us to use this NNA thing? Done! You got it. It doesnt make any difference to me. I dont even know what the hell the thing does. Look, what do you need from us? Is that all?
 
Thanks, Trent. Youre a sweetheart. Thatd be great. Well Im glad we could settle this so easily. You know, Wayne, if you ever need anything else, just give me a ring. My door is always open. Hell, I dont even have a door! Heh, heh. Of course, Trent. Thanks so much. Here, let me see you out.
 
Trent ushered Wayne to the door. Oh, there is one more thing, Wayne added. Sure, what is it? Trent asked. Well, Ive just been noticing in my referer logs that traffic from Newsflip has been dropping sharply lately. Really? I had no idea, Trent replied. Now Im not asking for any special treatment here. Mo, goodness no, of course not. But if you guys could just look into the anomaly. Try to figure out what could be going haywire. That would be great. Oh, of course Wayne. Ill put my top guy on it. Thanks so much, Trent. Lets keep in touch. Lets.
 
All day, people came back and forth through Yerba Buena Park, while Jason and Sarah hung from the branches above their heads, talking. Indeed, hours passed before Jason even thought to consult his watch. Jason was used to seeing other people as a necessary evil: curiosity and courtesy were behaviors he had worked hard to learn to imitate so that others didnt find him too strange, but he did his best to make sure other people took no more than a couple hours of his time.
 
Sarah was different. She was the only person hed ever talked to who made him feel completely relaxed in his own skin. He didnt have to worry about being someone else or trying to be interesting or checking the time. They just talked and talked and laughed and laughed.
 
Sarah looked up at the sun overhead where it hung suspended above the park. Hey, lets go grab some lunch she said, and swung down, branch to branch, before leaping to the ground. Jason followed, smiling.
 
Wayne got back in front of the camera and pressed the button.
 
Alright, for todays Internet Hero segment, where I keep an eye out for the other people who are keeping an eye out for you. Id like to give a big shout-out to one of my favorite Internet startups, Newsflip. I had a great conversation today with Newsflips CEO, Trent Rayburn, and he told me a bit about Newsflips philosophy and strategy and I have to say, Im 100% on board.
 
There are a lot of companies out there that just dont understand users. They think you, the people who make their companies run, are just people to be spat on and squeezed for cash. Not at Newsflip. Theres a company that puts users first. And I salute them for it. So thats todays Internet Hero: Newsflip.
 
Tomorrow: Chapter Three
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  2, 2007
 
Would you like any feedback on your writing style?
 
posted by Callum
 on November  3, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  1, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Chapter 1
 
Tick. Slip off backpack, place on table, slide out laptop, place in bin.
Take out wallet, take out cell phone, take out loose change, place in
bin. Face straight forward, wait for signal, walk through slowly,
collect stuff. Tock. Jason did not waste time.
 
At the gate he read a magazine, on the plane he read a book, on the bus
he checked his email. He went through familiar motions as if he had cut
from them each unnecessary effort. He analyzed every moment of his life
with an unsparing critical eye. He walked down hallways with purposeful
strides  well, as purposeful as one can be if one is a gangly teenager
attempting to carry a duffle bag bigger than oneself.
 
The woman behind the glass yelled at him as he tried to squeeze the
duffle bag through the turnstile. The bus dropped him off five city
blocks from his destination. His destination was closed and locked and
empty and unfeeling and he was trapped alone carrying everything he
owned in a city he barely knew.
 
A cab sped by.
 
Trent stood up from his desk. Sometimes he did that. He wasnt going
anywhere or signaling something. He just liked standing up and looking
out over all that he surveyed. He savored the feeling of being at the
pinnacle of achievement. He didnt think hed ever get tired of that
feeling.
 
Over there was the team hed hired away from Microsoft with promises of
a looser corporate culture and better weather. And over there, the
startup hed acquired after reading about them in one of the industry
weblogshe couldnt recall whichand after hardball negotiations
bought them and brought them here. And, over there, the UI
designer, helping all the programmers to make their code more friendly.
He watched them all working as one smooth harmonious unit.
 
He sat back down and looked over the days schedule. First, a staff
meeting. He flicked through his PowerPoint one last time and then headed
to the conference room to set up the projector. At 9:00 the computers of
every employee simultaneously chimed with an on-screen alert announcing
that a meeting was supposed to begin. But, as usual, the programmers
were so deeply engrossed in their work that they didnt even hear the
bell. Staff meeting, he shouted, but still no one moved. Oh, those
programmers. How dedicated!
 
He walked around the cubicles, pulling headphones off ears to make sure
everyone got the news. They got up and followed him to the conference
room. God, programmers have such odd dazed looks and slackened jaws.
Spending that much time in front of a screen really must be bad for your
expression.
 
Once everyone was settled in the conference room, he flipped to the
first slide. 25,000 it proclaimed in white block letters against a
stark black background. 25,000 he said out loud, just to hammer the
point home. We have to do better, he said.
 
Now I know all of you are working hard. Dont think I dont see the way
you all hurry back from lunch exactly at 1 and get back into the groove, typing furiously and shouting. He heard some muffled noises from the
back of the room. He smiled; they thought he didnt notice.
 
But 25,00 is just not enough. I want 30,000. Alright. The other piece
of news is that weve got a new guy coming in today. Hes one of the top
students from this years class at MIT, so Im sure hell be an amazing
addition to the team. I hope youll all help him get acquainted with the
system.
 
OK, I guess thats it. Now back to work! he shouted, and laughed. He
loved to keep the mood light.
 
Back at his desk, he checked the days schedule. Some phone calls, then
a lunch meeting, then a bit of a break so he could put the finishing
touches on his spreadsheets, then one more meeting ending right at 5 so
he could race out the door to his parked car and head home to his loving
wife.
 
Lazy day. Sarah slid out of bed and tossed on a tshirt and some panties. Her bare feet tip-toed across the wooden floor as she rummaged around the kitchen for something that might be made into a kind of breakfast. Some granola over here. A bit of fruit over there. Just add a bowl and a spoon and youre done.
 
She ate it at the kitchen counter while flicking through the days email on her laptop: George, John, Tom, James, Jim  delete, delete, delete, delete, delete. Sigh, no mail again. She checked a couple blogs, splashed some water on her face, threw on pants, and grabbed her skateboard, tossing it out the window. Her bare feet soon followed. She didnt wear shoes.
 
Dodging traffic on Mission Street ought to be some kind of videogame.
Swerving past this street vendor only to dive in front of that old mans
cart, then around again past the giggling children and ducking under the
flailing arms of their screaming parents. And that was just the
sidewalk.
 
At the office she hurried past the programmer cubicles, their windows
streaming last nights YouTube highlights and some networked videogames
and the requisite bluster of the Wayne Darnus show. She slid down into
her chair and plotted yet another day of how she was going to persuade
the programmers to stop making their interfaces so horrible. In other
words, another day of dealing with unceasing, uncomprehending
rejection.
 
Wayne woke up happy, as he always did. Then he sat down at his computer to read the news. One hand clicked through each headline, his blood pressure rising at each fresh outrage, while the other hand grabbed handfuls of cereal from the box he kept by the side of his desk. As he crunched through the dry cereal, its sharp edges lacerating his gums, he felt his anger turn to rage until he could no longer contain himself. So he turned on his camera.
 
He popped open the recording software, making sure he got his nose squarely in its frame, his face so close that spittle would land on the lens. In a world where every teenage kid could stream a live feed of himself having sex to millions, only the most aggressive vlogcasters survived. Wayne was no dummy. He didnt get to be the number seven blog in the TechnoScene rankings by sitting back and offering his opinions. No. This was war and every show a battle.
 
Todays enemy? Newsflip, one of the crummy little online news aggregator sites, which was threatening to write him out of the history books by dumping the technology hed single-handedly invented, news notation analysis (NNA), and going with some upstart competitor that didnt even bother to have an acronym for a name. Sure, Newsflip was a tiny site in the scheme of things, but if it switched it would set a dangerous precedent.
 
He pressed the button and watched the light go green. Goooooood
morning, he said, with his best attempt at the cheerful voice that
Californians love. I was seriously disheartened to hear about some
dangerous changes afoot at Newsflip.  The company plans to abandon their
users by abandoning their support for NNA. Now longtime viewers will
remember how hard we fought to get NNA adopted. And you won: now NNA is
used on every major news site, is built into Windows and Macs, forms the
basis of the modern online news ecosystem.
 
Newsflip wants to turn their back on all that by getting rid of NNA.
They claim theyre doing it to make things simpler for users. But how is
it simpler for users to get rid of one of the key features that they
depend on?
 
But frankly, I think the biggest loser if this move goes forward will
be Newsflip. Now, Im not saying that all of you should go out and
boycott Newsflip, but as users I do think you should make your opinions
heard. Ive always said, technology is about the user. Without you,
thered be no technology business. I think Newsflip might need to be
reminded of that.
 
He pressed the button again and the light blinked off. There. That
ought to show them.
 
Tomorrow: Chapter Two
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  1, 2007
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 31, 2007
 
Title: Bubble City: Preface
 
November is National Novel Writing Month, or NaNoWriMo. The idea, as far
as I can discern, is that more people ought to be writing novels. But
whether this is for us or them is not clear.
 
Novels have an odd place in our culture. They can be capital-L
Literature, as in the Great American Novel. Or they can be
entertainment, as in romance or mystery novels. Or, and perhaps best,
they can capture the essence of a place or time by using it as the
backdrop for a story.
 
In this way, a novel is disguised memoir, as anyone who is friends with
a novelist can readily discern. And, like a memoir, writing them can be
therapeutic, exorcising a writers demons, while hopefully being more
entertaining.
 
Over the next month I will be serializing a novel, Bubble City, in this space, one chapter every day. NaNoWriMo requires novels be at least 50,000 words in length and thirty days hath November, so Ill aim for 1666 words a day, although if I get lazy I may make some days shorter if I go over on previous ones.
 
There are lots of reasons not to read
it: I have no experience writing long-form fiction, I will be writing
this live and thus bound to errors I make in previous chapters, you will
undoubtedly be negatively portrayed in it, I have not really planned
this out, and I have no great things to say. Each posts title will
begin with Bubble City: so you can easily ignore them.
 
That said, if you want to read a yarn about the denizens of San
Francisco startups, the power they presume to have over the world, and
what happens when programmers get in over their heads, stay tuned.
 
Tomorrow: Chapter One
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 31, 2007
 
Ah, then youre simultaneously also participating in National Blog Posting Month.
 
posted by Gavin Baker
 on November  1, 2007 #
 
Im not sure this is the way to write a novel.
 
If I were you, I would write the chapters as you intend, but also spend time rewriting and rethinking.
 
Then next month, post it as a serial. I think youll get higher quality this way.
 
Have fun!
 
posted by Ivan
 on November  1, 2007 #
 
Good choice of topic. Good luck!
 
posted by Xavier Vespa
 on November  2, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 29, 2007
 
Title: How to Build Decent Productivity Software
 
These days it seems like everyone is making productivity software  software that helps you manage all the the things you need to get done. Yet all of them seem to be missing some basic pieces. A productivity application has two jobs: remembering everything you need to do and getting you to do it. The second is necessary because without it, youll put all your tasks in the application and then never do them. The first is necessary because otherwise the application will have no idea what to tell you to do.
 
I think the ideal piece of productivity software would be like having a great assistant or a campaign manager: someone who intimately knows all aspects of your lifes todo lists and schedules and wasnt afraid of saying you had to wrap this meeting up because you promised the kids youd be home at 5 to take them to the game. Judged against this standard, present productivity software is woefully lacking  its usually not much more than a glorified todo list.
 
Remembering everything: Most software lets you store the classical todo list items: call Jon back, finish report, buy toy for kids.1 Some systems even branch out into vaguer life goal stuff: spend time with family, become accomplished novelist, learn more about history. But thats about it.
 
But most people also have tasks in their project management software (fix this bug), various calendar-style events (lunch with Jon, catch plane), and a vast quantity of email (answer Jons question, fix the frobnitz and report back to Bob, etc.) Yet no one seems to have dared to integrate their software with a calendar, email client, or even bug tracking software.
 
Since its unlikely anyone writing productivity software is also going to write an email client, a calendar, and a bug tracker (although it would be nice), Ill settle for having support for plugins that import tasks and events from these various other apps. It has to be very simple to upload your whole life to your todo app.
 
Getting you to do stuff: The best Ive seen is some kind of filtering in which the software lets you only look at tasks that can be done in 5 minutes while on a train. But if youre the kind of person whos dysfunctional enough to need productivity software, simply having a big list of tasks probably isnt going to help you much. (I can write a big list of tasks in Notepad.) Instead, the software should be proactive about getting you to do stuff, like telling you to quit goofing off and get ready for that big deadline you have tomorrow or to hurry up and answer that urgent email from yesterday.
 
How does it do this? First, it needs to know whats important. After you import your life it should let you walk through and triage it all: look at each one and decide how important it is (or whether its already done). Ive written a program to do this just for my mail and its been invaluable  within a couple hours a morass of three thousand messages turned into a neatly labeled set of piles ordered by importance. Similarly, it can turn a tall pile of assorted todos into the beginnings of an action plan.
 
Then comes the crucial part: it tells you what to do. Im not demanding anything fancy, like a robot dog that follows you around and barks orders (although that might be nice). Im just saying provide a little pop-up window with a suggested next task. Psychologically, its easy to ignore a long todo list. In fact, long todo lists are depressing and make you want to look away. But a simple suggestion about one particular thing to do next is much harder to dismiss.
 
Of course, the suggestions have to be good. The software would generate them by taking into account everything it knows about your tasks and calendar today. And if you still dont like the suggestion, you tell the program you cant do it because:
 
and so on. Ideally, the system would be well-informed and smart enough that you could trust its predictions. But even if it wasnt perfect, just suggesting tasks in order of priority would likely be a vast improvement over the whimsical system used by most people in need of productivity software. Its hard to imagine such a tool wouldnt be a godsend.
 
Aaron Swartz has too large of a todo list to write this program by himself, but if youre interested in working on it hed love to help. Email him at me@aaronsw.com
 
(Postscript: Dearest readers, telling me that your favorite glorified todo list has an API that allows me write all the importers I want as well as write the task suggestion system I described is not an answer. My point is that todo lists should have these features; not that they should allow me to write them.)
 
Most of the classical productivity guides are aimed at middle managers whose lives, as far as we can tell from the examples, consist of calling people, finishing reports, and placating their families. Who am I to break with tradition?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 29, 2007
 
http://orgmode.org/ seems to solve lots of these problems; Ive just started using it, and its a great organizer with some easy customizations. Also, the developer(s?) are quite responsive to bug reports and suggestions.
 
Its an emacs mode, which 1) may rule it out for many users, and 2) means it wont do obtrusive popus. But other than that, it seems like 90% of what youre looking for.
 
posted by 
 on October 29, 2007 #
 
Ive been using Remember the Milk for about a year now, and it seems to provide most of what you describe (and what I consider essential in a todo app).
 
You can email tasks in, which is a great low barrier interface to the system. I set filters to forward email I get, when appropriate, to my todo list. When  a new bug gets assigned to me in Launchpad, for example, it gets forwarded to my todo, with the correct tags (depending on the project the bug is in). Of course, this setup relies on me maintaining it.
 
I tag all my tasks by context (tasks for which I need to be connected to the net, tasks for which I need to be at home, shopping I need to do when Im on the high street), priority and time estimate, so its always easy to find out what I should work on next.
 
RtM can talk to me via Jabber, so I dont even need to use the web interface just to find out that its time for that next task.
 
RtM has a pretty good API, so its easy to write plugins, but I havent seen anything yet that connects other sources of data (I rely on the email interface alone, but it requires me to be an email hacker, which I understand not everyone can be).
 
RtM has a great user interface, its a pleasure to use, and since theyve added Google Gears support I even have my tasks offline.
 
But RtM doesnt seem to have truly taken off - it looks like it was designed to fit perfectly with one of the major online app providers, but so far it doesnt look like it generated much interest. I think I know why - an efficient todo app isnt a something thats ever going to be popular, because most people dont actually want to be productive.
 
If you take a look at what applications are generating most interest and money these days, it is stuff that helps people be less productive and suppress the necessary bad feelings that come with boredom and impotence, not something that reminds them that they should get back to work.
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on October 29, 2007 #
 
I just broke out of my feed reader to tell you about rememberthemilk.com too.  It has priorities, time estimates, physical contexts and due dates as you outline above.  It doesnt have dependencies.  I deal with them by setting a future due date which causes them to disappear from my action smart list.
 
You can use the excellent search to find tasks matching whatever criteria you need.  And you can save any search as smart list which is then viewable just like any of your other lists.
 
I fire tasks to it with a little ruby script I wrote from the terminal.
 
It isnt perhaps what you are dreaming of although it isnt far off either.  Perhaps some program sitting above the API could use the search capability to do the next task is  ? prompting?
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on October 29, 2007 #
 
Since its unlikely anyone writing productivity software is also going to write an email client, a calendar, and a bug tracker (although it would be nice)
 
OSAF is doing all of that, and Im sure they could use your help.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on October 29, 2007 #
 
Ive been working on a webapp Smacklet. It is not done yet; Ill send you an email as soon as it is. Ive been using a crude version of it and I can say that I get more things done now.
 
posted by Kirubakaran
 on October 29, 2007 #
 
Thanks Aaron!  Great ideas on the Assistant Pop-up letting you know when you should be doing something else (it thinks you should be doing).  Were adding that to our web app http://www.streamfocus.com .
 
posted by Fred Gibson
 on October 29, 2007 #
 
I really like your not now and heres why approach, even if the end result is that you realize that you no longer have any excuse to not be doing a particular task.
 
I would maybe add a I dont have the energy excuse, if only for tracking and learning when youre likely to finally complete that cringe-worthy task youve been avoiding.
 
One thing that would be handy for me is an urgency curve, or at least a selection of urgency profiles like deadline, appointment or steadily increasing risk of attracting flies.
 
posted by Frank
 on October 29, 2007 #
 
Im just starting out developing a new todo application (translation: Ive got a domain name and some basic ideas). I like the idea of a low cost of entry coupled with adding data over time; that model is something Ive been playing with for this and another separate project in the last few weeks.
 
posted by Paul
 on October 30, 2007 #
 
I second that, OSAF is working on just what youve described, it looks pretty promising.
 
posted by Callum
 on October 30, 2007 #
 
After you import your life it should let you walk through and triage it all: look at each one and decide how important it is (or whether its already done). Id never get to that.
 
posted by Owen Byrne
 on October 30, 2007 #
 
Heh, Ive probably been working on this for about a decade now, but am too lousy at getting things done to have much to show
 
Latest version Im playing with is using a quick & dirty desktop app to post stuff off to my online Personal Knowledge Base. Ive got the posting-off side done, not got onto task editing etc. yet. The first priority was to be able to log & view what Ive done, and that bit I have got going:
http://danja.talis.com/timegrid/
http://dannyayers.com/2007/10/04/a-little-dogfood
 
A critical point (IMHO) is not to hardwire any particular user interface to the data store, so you can hook up existing tools (like OSAF, as mentioned above) to a common store. Which means using a flexible data model alongside well-defined protocols - the obvious choice being Semantic Web tech. The basic modelling can easily be covered by RDF/OWL, the prioritisation etc being added as a fairly lightweight numberic layer on top.
 
Over the years Ive played with mapping between quite a few related tools and the common model*, although this time around the only one Ive so far hooked up has been a todo.txt parser. (Guess I should do a todo.txt renderer soon).
 
posted by Danny
 on October 30, 2007 #
 
Sorry, typo: s/numberic/numeric
 
(although the former does sound quite appealing)
 
Also the last line is meant to be a footnote with a *, not a bullet point.
 
posted by Danny
 on October 30, 2007 #
 
Check out gootodo.com for an interesting take on the todo list. I got turned onto it after reading Bit Literacy by Mark Hurst and Im a believer.
 
posted by Rahul Pathak
 on October 30, 2007 #
 
hello,
 
your post is very interesting. I have been working for the last month on researching and implementing a manufacturing scheduling algorithm for a small furniture workshop. I was totally ignorant of the field a few months ago but it was a very interesting experience. Anyway: I read your entry with this bias and the system you sketch here seems very close to problems that I have been working on recently with this project.
 
I discovered that one of the key aspect is that it is not so much a data architecture problem, nor it is an interface design challenge: as you noted it should integrate into already built data and interface systems, plus the data to record is quite straightforward (dates, text, dates) so the difficult and interesting bit to figure out is the recommendation or prioritization algorithm. To produce a sufficiently well done algorithm thatll prompt you with a relevant list of five things to consider doing just now and can minimally learn how to do so as you use it.
 
And more than that there is some times where the system should not prompt me anything to do and be elegantly silent: there are activities that I do with pleasure and without any exterior incentive, reading books, drawing, cooking, doing nothing
 
This seems essential in order for me to be able to rely on such a system. If it was constantly and bluntly pushing his five relevant things to me I would stop doing what he says. And there are some times where it would be encouraging to have quasi empty list that says for example: do just one thing and you are done for now
 
The rules that you started to lay down on the end of your post seems very pragmatic and right to start in this direction. Today it seems to me that a library of code that implement such prioritization and task recommendation processes would be the best contribution to the field. In the domain of manufacturing scheduling among several other interesting examples: http://www.frepple.com/
 
posted by Pierre schmidt
 on October 30, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 22, 2007
 
Title: Area Scientists Study Confirms Own Prejudices
 
CAMBRIDGE, MAIn a study published today in the prestigious journal Nature, Harvard professor Dr. Thomas Jacobson, an expert in the field of physical neuroscience, finds that the gangly cortex, the area of the brain associated with stumbling, fumbling, and general klutziness, is smaller in members of the Red Sox sports team than in other major league baseball players.
 
The study, entitled Differential Size Analysis of the Gangly Cortex In Professional Sports, was conducted using a technique called Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging, or fMRI, in which brain activity is observed on a computer monitor while subjects perform a mental activity. In his fMRI studies, Dr. Jacobson noted significantly less mental activity in the gangy cortex of Red Sox players when he asked them to visualize various aspects of a baseball game.
 
Obviously far more research needs to be done, explained Dr. Jacobson, but this evidence does appear to support the popular belief that Red Sox players are just better than everyone else.
 
The study could have major implications for the entire field of physical neuroscience, which examines how differences in the brain can affect performance in various types of strenuous physical activity, including baseball, American football, running the mile, hockey, and the biathlon.
 
I havent seen the study but I think its extremely brave work, said former Harvard President Lawrence Summers when asked to comment. Theres an academic orthodoxy of political correctness that says you shouldnt inquire too much into the differences between sports teams. Well, Dr. Jacobson has thrown that out the window and science is better off for it.
 
The study appears in the July 27th issue of Nature, along with new research showing that eating chocolate is good for your heart, Jews are just smarter than everyone else, semen makes women happier, and all women are bisexual. A new study showing that having sex with scientists is associated with a 20-point increase in IQ is expected to be released soon.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 22, 2007
 
My psychology professors at the university taught us to not pay too much attention to these kinds of findings. Nazis had brillliant scientists who could scientifically prove the superiority of the Ariens race. However, its pretty fun stuff, and if getting with a scientist really gets you a 20 point increase in your IQ, Im gonna turn into a scientists whore and become super smart, right?
 
posted by Xavier Vespa
 on October 22, 2007 #
 
Blogs are around 24% more likely to contain unverified findings than mainstream news, so Ill wait until this pops up on CNN before I believe a thing.
 
posted by Philipp Lenssen
 on October 22, 2007 #
 
My psychology professors at the university taught us to not pay too much attention to these kinds of findings. Nazis had brillliant scientists who could scientifically prove the superiority of the Ariens race. However, its pretty fun stuff, and if getting with a scientist really gets you a 20 point increase in your IQ, Im gonna turn into a scientists whore and become super smart, right?
 
It depends.  Do you look like scientists on CSI or L&O?  If so, yep  20+ increase.
 
posted by freedumb2003
 on October 22, 2007 #
 
Todays date: 22 October 2007
 
Quote 1: In a study published today in the prestigious journal Nature
 
Quote 2: The study appears in the July 27th issue of Nature
 
Surely today cannot also be July 27th, this year or next, that would break all kinds of laws of psychics :)
 
posted by Callum
 on October 23, 2007 #
 
wonder why the study cant be found anywhere else on the internet
 
posted by 
 on October 23, 2007 #
 
Too funny!  Did you also know that giving money to scientists makes you wealthier?  Try it and see!
 
posted by GaryB
 on October 23, 2007 #
 
I quote one paragraph of one of the articles you link:
 
Even gay men who deny their own homosexuality will become more sexually aroused by male sexual stimuli than by female stimuli.
 
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2003/06/030613075252.htm
 
They know these man are gay even though they deny their homosexuality! Wether the scientist spy these people at home or they throw a bunch of bones to know if the man is really a gay.
 
Thats really bad science.
 
posted by pqs
 on October 25, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 12, 2007
 
Title: Dear Colleagues: Orders from Chinas Minister of Internet Censorship
 
from Journey to the Heart of Internet Censorship
 
The Xinhua exclusive Who is most hurt by the Web? is available at the follow address: http://news.xinhuanet.com/focus/2006-05-08/content_4494204.htm. It contains many articles, so each site is asked to put a link on its home page so that Internet users can read them directly on the Xinhua site. This will reduce the amount of work for each site. (9 May 2006)
 
The website Qianlong has already posted a news report about a change in the increase in Beijing taxi fares (http://beijing.qianlong.com/3825/2006/05/19/134@3182655.htm). All sites are asked to put it in their news section, but not in a prominent position, to not put it on their front page, and to stop comments on the subject. (19 May 2006)
 
You are asked not to cover the matter of the real estate auction of public land at Dadun Beidingcun, in the Chaoyang district of Beijing. (22 May 2006)
 
Regarding the news report, After a programming revision, the CCTV central television station has decided to stop broadcasting the national anthem, websites must not post it, refer to it or comment on it, and those that have already posted it should take it down. Step up monitoring of forums, blogs and comments on the news, and suppress offensive or insulting reports as quickly as possible. Comply strictly with these instructions! (27 May 2006)
 
A few agitators got residents in Dongzhou (in the southern district of Shanwei) to commit an act of vandalism on a windmill and attack the police on 6 December. The competent authorities are in the process of taking measures to resolve this problem, and the trial of those responsible for this unrest is taking place right now. The leading news media in Guangdong province and thewebsites Nanfang Xinwen, Jinyang, Dayang and Shenzhen Xinwen are currently covering the case and will publish articles on this subject on 24 and 25 May. No news websites from other provinces should cover the case or post articles on the subject. Discussion forums, blogs and comments must not talk about the subject. (22 May 2006)
 
Dear colleagues, regarding the death of a radio presenter while she was at the deputy mayors home, do not disseminate any reports, do not send any new articles, withdraw those that have already been posted on the site, and ensure that forums, blogs and messages no longer refer to this case. Please reply. (30 May 2006)
 
Dear colleagues, the Internet has of late been full of articles and messages about the death of a Shenzhen engineer, Hu Xinyu, as a result of overwork. All sites must stop posting articles on this subject, those that have already been posted about it must be removed from the site and, finally, forums and blogs must withdraw all articles and messages about this case. (17 June 2006)
 
Regarding the issue of unequal income distribution, please use articles from the Central Committees main information mouthpieces and nothing else. Please do not spread rumours about this matter or conduct online polls. Please reinforce monitoring of comments, discussion forums and blogs and immediately block any violent or obscene message. (28 June 2006)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 12, 2007
 
Looks like at least somebody is taking responsibility for what gets said in the media.
 
posted by James Lee
 on October 13, 2007 #
 
Somehow Im made wonder if a similar but far subtler message isnt disseminated among major media outlets in the United States. The number of things that seem to get either missed or ignored by the big media.
 
To cite one example, try looking for mention of Reverend Lennox Yearwood Jr. being beaten by police outside the Gen. Petraeus hearing earlier this year. Somehow, MSNBC, ABC News, CBS News, and CNN (their web available content, anyway) all missed the story, which I thought wouldve been a huge deal.
 
Somewhat puzzlingly, the only major network to come through were Fox News, but I suppose a black man being beaten for no reason is their viewerships idea of entertainment.
 
posted by David Warde-Farley
 on October 17, 2007 #
 
The sentence at the end of paragraph one shouldve read,
 
The number of things that seem to get either missed or ignored by the big media is alarmingly high.
 
posted by David Warde-Farley
 on October 17, 2007 #
 
Fucking dictatorships.
 
A question: does the Internet Archive or Google keep copies of the articles/blog-posts removed?
 
posted by OMouse
 on October 19, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: September 27, 2007
 
Title: The Joy of Public Speaking
 
A few months ago I was asked if I wanted to give a talk (via videoconference) to a technology conference in India. Being extraordinarily bad at saying no, I said yes. I asked what they wanted me to talk about and they said I could speak about whatever I liked. I thought about it for a while and concluded that I should talk about my life and how I got out of a small town in the middle of the country and ended up working with famous people. Due to a timing screw up, I didnt get to spend as much time on it as I liked, but I did my best. I can put the draft up if anyone wants it. (Update: Heres the talk, as prepared.)
 
(My hope was that talking about all these things would give people lots of different subjects to ask questions on, and then I could go into more detail about whatever interested people. But oddly, the questions were instead mostly about the few things Id left out of the narrative. I wonder if that means I addressed everything in enough detail that I answered all their questions or whether I didnt talk about the things they actually cared about.)
 
Giving a talk via videoconference is a painful thing. First, your disembodied head is looming six feet tall over a room of people. Its hard to imagine thats attractive to anyone other than Big Brothers most ardent fan. Second, you have only the blurriest view of the audience youre speaking to. Third, you cant hear whether theyre laughing or not, because if you get an audio channel then all you hear is the delayed sound of your own voice repeated back to you  which is incredibly distracting  so instead all you get is silence. Its incredibly difficult to connect with an audience under these conditions.
 
Still, I did my best, and Im told it went reasonably well. I sure had fun  theres a real buzz you get from speaking before an audience, whether its on the radio or via videocast or in person. Suddenly your depression and thirst and hunger melt away and you just light up with enthusiasm and energy. The students who filled the room I was addressing applauded and thanked me; but in truth I really owe a debt to them.
 
(P.S. If you did attend the talk, Id love your honest feedback on how it went. Send me email at me@aaronsw.com or post a comment. Thanks!)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 27, 2007
 
i want to see the draft.
 
posted by nec
 on September 28, 2007 #
 
That is, of course, The Thing Everyone Wants to Know About You.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on September 28, 2007 #
 
Yes, we want the draft.
 
posted by demaratus
 on September 28, 2007 #
 
Great talk!  I cant believe you werent going to put it online!  Im off to be more curious 
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on September 29, 2007 #
 
fairly well off? stuck in a small town in the middle of the country? You had to figure out some tricks for getting out of that?
 
Didnt you grow up in Highland Park, less than 20 miles from Chicago? Highland Park, where the median household income is over $100,000? Didnt you attend a private elementary school that cost over $18,000 a year?
 
Please, tell us more about the tricks you used to escape that situation!
 
posted by ed bowlinger
 on September 29, 2007 #
 
hey there,
 
i just wanted to say that talk that u gave was neat but the draft up of it says the tech fest was in calcutta, which is totally wrong. it was in a place called calicut(which is way down south here in india).
 
posted by Rohit Suresh
 on October  1, 2007 #
 
I loved reading that.  Is there a podcast version of it?
 
posted by spez
 on October  2, 2007 #
 
The talk says you grew up white.  I didnt know you were white.  And Ive met you a number of times!
 
posted by Kragen Javier Sitaker
 on October 15, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: September 21, 2007
 
Title: Was Rachel Carson a Mass Murderer?
 
A new issue of one of my favorite magazines, Extra! is hitting the streets, with a blurb for my article inside on the cover. When I decided to get into political journalism, Extra! was the first magazine I turned to. Every other month they issue a brilliant magazine full of articles which collect and dissect the standard media narratives on a particular issue and then lay out the real story for you. Its invaluable. I think of their work as a good digest of the news: you get the same misinformation youd get everywhere else but you also get how and why its misinformation.
 
For my first piece, I decided to take on the noise machine thats been loudly proclaiming in news outlets across the land that the environmentalist movement, headed by Rachel Carson, is responsible for the deaths of millions of African babies. Why? Because they discouraged the use of the noxious pesticide DDT, which was previously used for controlling the spread of malaria.
 
For the article, I dug into the science, interviewed the man behind the misinformation campaign (Roger Bate, a character straight out of Thank You For Smoking), and corrected claims from right-wing think tanks (no, Rachel Carson did not kill all those babies) and from blogs (no, the whole misinformation campaign is not funded by the tobacco companies).
 
You can read the full article on Extra!s website or Ive put up a version linking to all my sources.
 
An interesting footnote: As I noted above, Roger Bate insisted he had not been funded by the tobacco companies, as many have claimed. Instead, he said, their main original funder was the May and Stanley Smith Charitable Trust. The trust, a $264 million California foundation started by a mining magnate, has the mission of provid[ing] grants to organizations that serve the needs of children, the elderly, the disabled, and the disadvantaged. However, it has also been a major contributor to the libertarian Cato Institute and George Mason University. Bate says that its trustee, Luther Avery, didnt agree entirely with everything I was suggesting but at least thought the debate was worthy of being exposed.
 
In 2001, Luther Avery passed away, leaving his $400,000 a year trustee job to his son, Mark Avery, making Mark the fifth highest-paid foundation executive in the Bay Area (San Francisco Business Times, 11/14/03). But apparently that wasnt enough  Avery stole $52 million from the Foundation and fled to Alaska. (San Francisco Chronicle, 6/10/07). This June he pled guilty and now he faces a maximum sentence of 20 years in prison. (U.S. Attorney for Alaska, 3/6/07)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 21, 2007
 
Misconceptions both on the right and the left? Argh thanks for joining the flotilla of enablers that excuse the crimes of the right by pretending both sides are to blame.
 
No, DDT is a meme of the right. Most hardcore right-wingers have heard of it and think DDT is good because the left banned it. Most left-wingers have simply never heard of this idea.
 
You cite a bunch of right-wingers in this story. The closest I saw to someone potentially on the left was an opinion piece you sourced to the San Francisco Examiner  it was by Angela Logomasini of the Competitive Enterprise Institute.
 
This is a case of out-and-out fraud by the right, fraud which has probably killed people in developing countries by discouraging Americans to the right of Bill Clinton from supporting programs that could actually save lives, like drug-treated mosquito nets.
 
Dont be afraid to assign blame where its due. Its the only thing that may save us.
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on September 21, 2007 #
 
Sorry, it was just too hard to resist my one chance to play the false balance game. Ive changed it to right-wing think tanks and blogs. Is that better? My point was not that both the right and the left are spreading these bogus myths  I was simply gently noting that a handful of blogs had made a mistake in responding to the right-wing myths.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on September 21, 2007 #
 
im glad to have this article to link to because ive been aware of the upswell of pro-DDT stuff and wasnt sure exactly where it was coming from, or how to address it. thx.
 
on another matter, the article with links you posted  is it supposed to be open to public editing?
 
posted by hapa
 on September 22, 2007 #
 
Hmm 
 
http://rabett.blogspot.com/2007/09/learn-to-listen-carefully-young-bunnies.html
 
Africa Fighting Malaria may not have gotten the money, but it sure looks like Bate did through ESEF or CCSI (ESEF folded about that time) and whether they passed it on and used it to found AFM is the real question.
 
With the like of Bate, one has to be precise.
 
Often, funded by X can encompass a level of indirection, or be an oversimplification where the full version is something like funded by X and fellow-travelers.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on September 22, 2007 #
 
Just a very minor correction for this entry: The links for the SFGate and SFBT articles have been reversed.
 
posted by FrF
 on September 28, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: September 16, 2007
 
Title: Sweating the Small Stuff
 
So Jottit has launched, only five months after I suggested to my friend Simon that we create a website that was just a big text box people could type stuff into. And there are two ways I look at it. One is: It took us five months to do that? And the other is: We did that in only five months?
 
When you look at what the site does, it seems pretty simple. It has few features, no complex algorithms, little gee-whiz gadgetry. It just takes your text and puts it on the Web. And considering how often I do that every day, it seems a bit odd that it took so long to create yet another way. And then I check the todo list.
 
As Ive said, this is a site I wanted to get every little detail right on. And when you start sweating the small stuff, its frankly incredible just how much of it there is. Even our trivial site is made up of over two dozen different screens. Each one of those screens has to be designed to look and work just right on a wide variety of browsers, with a wide variety of text in them.
 
And thats just making things look good  making them work right is much harder. Each screen does, on average, five or six different things. And each of those things can be done under three or four different modes. Now were up to over 500 different things to do, each of which can have bugs in lots of unthought-of ways. And then, many of these pieces are exposed to users, who can do whatever they want with them  and do. If youre building a site that accepts text from users, you need to think about something that lets some people just paste stuff from emails, others write HTML, others play YouTube videos, while others try to insert malicious text to break things for people.
 
There are lots of features we want to add to Jottit, but before we do any of that we want to make what we have work perfectly. And, at the moment, that means tasks as varied as reporting a bug in a piece of software we use to its developer, configuring the web server to display a nicer error message under certain odd conditions, having another computer monitor the first computer to see if it goes down, figuring out how to tweak the UI to make certain unclear things clearer to people, rewriting some of the text on the site to be nicer, creating a new site to inform our users of updates, making some stuff from our project open source, fixing stuff in other open source projects, testing the site on phones and weird browsers, examining an algorithm we use to see if it needs improvement, and fixing a bug that was just reported by a user. And those are just the things on my todo list!
 
When you look at it that way, its amazing anyone ever builds a website.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
September 16, 2007
 
I simply love it ! 
The idea is simple and yet never been done this way before.
Nothing bloated and the result is very usable and simple.
Congrats! and again THANK YOU for this jewel.
 
I would be nice if you provide an API :)
 
posted by karim
 on September 16, 2007 #
 
I simply love it ! 
The idea is simple and yet never been done this way before.
Nothing bloated and the result is very usable and simple.
Congrats! and again THANK YOU for this jewel.
 
I would be nice if you provide an API :)
 
posted by karim
 on September 16, 2007 #
 
I said in an email, but Ill add here too: I like the Gill Sans.
 
Youre definitely on the right track with the interface.  Every wiki, blog, review, social network, etc. site should be as easy to jump into (not to mention as clutter-free).
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on September 16, 2007 #
 
It seems a bid odd that you graduated from a top school, Delbert.  Just send your stuff over to Robert Morris to proofread before you publish it next time.  Actually, youre just adding to the corpus of un-proofread websites with all this jotit stuff anyway.  Maybe as a paid service you could automatically forward everything to Robert Morris to proofread before publishing.  At least that would in fact be something.
 
posted by PG
 on September 16, 2007 #
 
Very, very slick.  Little touches like including an image were very nice.
 
Now you have to decide what features to add, and what features NOT to add :)
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on September 16, 2007 #
 
Is this infogami 2.0?
 
posted by bosco
 on September 16, 2007 #
 
@Bosco, its barely even Infogami 1.1.  And did you notice what happens if you click the Forgot Password link?  It sends you your original password.  Which means the passwords are stored in plain text.  Didnt Aaron learn anything the last time a well-known database of passwords got stolen?  Evidently they didnt cover hash functions and cryptographic responsibility in his Y Combinator seminars.
 
Incidentally, if anyone wants to set up a web page, I recommend WordPress.
 
posted by Eric TF Bat
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
@Eric TF Bat
 
It may be the case that Aaron and Simon are storing passwords as plaintext, but not storing them as a hash doesnt prove theyre not encrypting them.
 
posted by Matt Revelle
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
Oh my, this is a simply incredible tool, sheesh.
 
posted by Alex
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
Cool.  Im still pissed off you didnt win the wikimedia board election.
 
posted by Ben Yates
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
Eric: The password thing should be fixed in the next couple days.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
RSS would make it perfect.
 
posted by Carl
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
Wow! John Gruber of daringfireball.com told me about this site and I created my own page in about 1 minute. Such fun! Thank you, thank you.
 
posted by CB
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
I was really shocked: This is so easy and sweet, so useful and well done, it makes me wanna cry. Thank you so much.
 
posted by Dr. Reimund Blumen
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
Aaron - congrats on the launch!
 
You are at a point now where you can literally launch a site with just a big text box, and it creates a huge blog buzz.
 
That kind of marketing firepower is pretty sweet  1000s of other people out there couldve put something like this together and it would not have been looked upon the same way, or generated nearly any buzz whatsoever.  Anyway, congrats on your reddit success (etc) & the Jottit launch!
 
posted by Shanti Braford
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
This is incredible!
Perfectly designed - and the color picker with its now-the-text-goes-white wizardry wowed me.
 
posted by Cardinal Stra
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
@Aaron: Im glad youre fixing the password problem, but Im alarmed that you released a product that has the problem, especially considering that you work(ed) for Reddit.  I cant see a justification for ever storing plaintext passwords.
 
@Matt, the fact that it might be encrypted doesnt help.  Its physical computer theft were talking about here.
 
@Aaron: I have to admit, this thing is an improvement over the competition.  I was skeptical, but it does seem to be pretty close to the sweetspot.  You may have finally iPodified Geocities
 
posted by Eric TF Bat
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
This is great!
 
I really like the preview view.
 
posted by Michael Stevens
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
Very very very good.
 
An export site feature would be nice, in case this project dies like Infogami.
 
posted by Vladimir Slepnev
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
Wow, I really like this. Simple and just powerful enough. I add my vote for an API; I would love to replace Google Notes with Jottit and a Firefox plug-in would let me do that.
 
posted by Mark
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
I love it. I wish I could use Textile instead of Markdown.
 
posted by Willie Abrams
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
no rss?   sigh.
 
_r
 
posted by _ryan
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
Password hashing issues aside, Im impressed that youve already fixed the XSS issues that were apparent yesterday.
 
posted by Thom
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
Outstanding. Regarding some earlier comments: I too would like to have an export option; and, Im moving my stuff to Jottit because it enables Markdown rather than Textile  Ive always been annoyed by the Textile markup on Backpack pages, because in several other contexts I use Markdown. Also, Im just a wee bit concerned lest somewhere down the line Ive added twenty pages and find out that Ill now have to start paying for them .
 
posted by Alan Jacobs
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
You invent www 
the wikiwikiwiki
Great!!
 
posted by Jaaziel
 on September 17, 2007 #
 
@Eric, Im not convinced that the ability to decrypt users passwords is the largest concern when a physical theft occurs.  Who needs a users password when all their data is already accessible.
 
Suppose hashing is still the simplest and safest representation for storage, but its a hassle having to copy and paste a temporary password and then set a new password.
 
posted by Matt Revelle
 on September 18, 2007 #
 
Youve made something very special - thank you. Just this morning a 6th-grader came up to me in Computer Lab in a Massachusetts urban middle school and asked if I knew of a way he could create a web page.  I was delighted to tell him about Jottit.  Very cool.
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on September 18, 2007 #
 
Wonderful! Jottit is just what you sometimes need when on a forum, irc, im, etc.
 
posted by qrnlk
 on September 18, 2007 #
 
This is super! Finally I can stop emailing text to myself! This could very well replace the paper notepad.
 
Well done Aaron :)
 
posted by N
 on September 18, 2007 #
 
Ok, one complaint. I added a new page, but something strange happens when you try to give it a name with spaces or underscores in - the data in the page isnt saved!
 
You may want to look into that, or just prompt ppl with page name can only contain, blah blah
 
posted by N
 on September 18, 2007 #
 
Sorry, there was a bug that affected around 5 to 10 people. Its fixed now.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on September 18, 2007 #
 
Cool! Thanks Aaron, works brilliantly!
 
posted by N
 on September 19, 2007 #
 
So far it is going pretty well. However, Im looking forward for the new features that, I suppose, will be implemented in the near future.
 
posted by Alastor
 on September 20, 2007 #
 
I just tried Jottit, itd be so much more useful to me if I could enter formulas.
 
posted by 
 on September 20, 2007 #
 
I really love it, Aaron. Great job. My friend and I are using it to outline a project. Itd be great if there was a simple notification if someone is editing a document when you check on it. You can tell usually once you click to edit it because there will be a recently saved draft, but itd be nice if you didnt need that extra step.
 
posted by ScottBruin
 on September 21, 2007 #
 
Very nice. But one question - how are you making any money from this? I dont see any advertising. How is the host server paid for?
 
posted by Mark
 on September 23, 2007 #
 
aaron, i love it. youve implemented the sign-in/sign-up process exactly backwards. its brilliant. :)
 
posted by lane
 on September 23, 2007 #
 
Mark: Im paying for it.
 
lane: Thanks so much! Its an honor hearing that from you.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on September 23, 2007 #
 
thenx mf
 
Pusat
Pusat Dizisi
www.r10.net k? ?ya hay? yar?
porno
www.r10.net k? ?ya hay? yar?
www.r10.net k? ?ya hay? yar?
modifye
genco
car tuning
g??r
toplist
www.r10.net k? ?ya hay? yar?
 
posted by www.r10.net k? ?ya hay? yar?
 on September 24, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: August 31, 2007
 
Title: Perfectionism
 
This may be hard for you to believe, but Im something of a perfectionist. I get a special kind of joy out of tweaking every last detail until its just right, making sure each pixel is in its place. Unfortunately, Ive never really been able to indulge this desire on any of my previous projects, either because my skills are too weak (no matter how much time I spend on it, Ill never be able to craft a page like John Gruber can) or because time is too short.
 
At Reddit, for example, we were always rushing-rushing-rushing to get more done. In a recent post, Paul Graham suggests startups can make you rich if you simply make sure to email him once a week. At Reddit we had no such worries: Paul was sure to email us weekly, sometimes even daily, usually asking why we hadnt added any new features to the site lately. (In fairness, it worked, I suppose.)
 
When you get that question once a week, you get to try out many different answers, including questioning the premise. At first I give the usual low-level excuses: we werent feeling well this week, we had to go to a meeting, Alexis was out of town. Then we started in on more general principles: afraid of change, distracted by day-to-day fires, dissatisfaction with the codebase. And once I sent him Slates suggestion that the Eccentrics own egotistical indolence has resulted in self-imposed limits to their skillsat the very least it deprives the world of more of their unique cultural prognostications. (He was not amused.)
 
Paul eventually became convinced that we had written lots of good code but wouldnt release it because we were perfectionists. Knock it off, he would tell us. Its more important to get it up than to get it right. Paul had become convinced that users love seeing new features, it gave them the impression of an exciting vibrant site.
 
There is something to this, of course. But I have a contrary proposal: users love perfectionism. Creating something brilliant is a process of continual refinement: adding bits where theyre needed, chipping off others that arent, and sanding everything smooth once its in place, then polishing it until it gleams. Do one thing, release it, and dont stop releasing improvements until you do it really, really, well.
 
Adding features is part of this, of course, but not at all the whole thing. You cant create a great sculpture just by tossing on more and more clay.
 
Meanwhile, even if users cant immediately see all the subtle details youve added, they begin to add up to a feeling of  if youre talented  delight. The software knows where you want to go and has already laid out the trail. The path is worn smooth and shiny. Everything looks beautiful along the way.  And every day it gets a little bit better.
 
For my next startup, Jottit, thats the plan.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 31, 2007
 
The problem with perfectionism is that users can never love what they never see if a product never reaches perfection, the danger is that the the perfectionist either ends up never releasing it, or dumps out something they know is crap when they get sick of it (regardless of how great everyone else thinks it is) and loses interest in it forthwith.
 
posted by Gwenhwyfaer
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
I think Pauls point doesnt contradict yoursit sounds like he was just proposing that you live out loud. I think your first round of users are sort of expecting to be guinea pigs, and you need to carefully take advantage of them for their feedback. Simultaneously, you are stepping through continual refinement. Hopefully you reach a place of relative perfection by the time your next round of users come through the door, because they may not be as forgiving.
 
I think refinement tends to follow a series of arcs where you add features and things until you realize theres too much, then you remove and refine more until theyre back in balance. You could say this about any creative work. The top of the arc is the point where things are at their worst and most cluttered (eg. the four-button-plus-scroll-wheel iPod).
 
posted by Carl Tashian
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
I think the difference between excellence and something that has a lot of investment (time and money) is that special quality called talent.
 
Like your analogy to sculpture and the amount of clay applied: talent is knowing how much clay to apply and where to apply it.
 
Timeless art (Michelangelos sculptures and ceiling work come to mind) have both: earth-shaking talent and a limitless capacity for personal investment in the effort to make that art.
 
Make something that delites you and well see the difference. You may not make any oney but neither did Michelangelo.
 
In the tech world the difference is exemplified by Bill Gates and Gary Kildall. No one remembers CPM any more so we have to use Steve Jobs to illustrate excellence in technology. I can live with that despite the fact that Jobs drives the talent absolutely crazy at times. In the Michelangelo paradigm hes the Pope and not the artist: the patron of great works. Gary Kildall on the other hand genius.
 
posted by mcd
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
Are you really that much of a perfectionist if you cant properly spell perfectionist  (ie. your title)
 
posted by Brash
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
Youre totally wrong. Users could care less about perfection. Things have to sorta work most of the time, sure anything beyond that is engineer OCD.
 
posted by stark fist of reality
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
maybe we need both?
 
Coda was high on the perfection scale, but theyre losing my excitement because they havent been releasing regularly.
 
posted by tk
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
You can so create a great sculpture just by tossing on more and more clay. If you do it right. OKCupid uses that method, and imho its pretty awesome.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
Real Artists Ship.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
tk: Have you tried TextMate? ;)
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
Gwen: Im not suggesting that you only release when youre perfect. Just that its what you aim for.
 
Rus: TextMate is the last piece of software that delighted me, but I cant remember the last time it shipped a genuine change.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
There are 2 things to keep in mind:
 
The quality of a delivered product or feature increases logarithmically with delivery time.
 
The use value of a delivered product or feature decreases exponentially with delivery time.
 
Lets call the point on the time graph where the two plot lines intersect perfect ship date (PSD). Before PSD youre creating value by not shipping and after PSD youre destroying value by not shipping. Since the point is unknowable you have to choose which side of the point youd rather err on.
 
I think history shows that erring on the early side is a better survival strategy than erring on the late side. Worse is better: http://www.jwz.org/doc/worse-is-better.html
 
posted by David Mathers
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
Another example of worse-is-better: Im reading this on the World Wide Web, not on Xanadu.
 
posted by David Mathers
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
I just read your thought again and I think I missed your point in my response.
 
If your point is that a product that provokes an emotional response is delivering significantly more user value than one that is merely functional, then I agree completely.
 
posted by David Mathers
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
Hey Aaron,
 
I think you might appreciate the irony of publishing a post on your perfectionism that has a grammatical error in it.
 
Paul Graham suggests startups can make you rich if you simple be sure to email him once a week.
 
Ian
 
posted by Ian
 on August 31, 2007 #
 
Aaron:
 
TextMate is the last piece of software that delighted me, but I cant remember the last time it shipped a genuine change.
 
Yeah, was just responding to tks comment about Coda.  And yeah, Allan had better get to work on that. :)
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on September  1, 2007 #
 
David Mathers:
 
I think youre on the right track, but not quite there.  In my view, a product can never be merely functional.  If it doesnt provoke an emotional response, thats critical missing functionality.
 
Well-designed products minimize mental overhead through elegant simplicity.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on September  1, 2007 #
 
Perfection isnt as important as is a well-adapted system.  Determining which functionality best satisfies a majority of the uses for the largest sub-set(s) of your user base will prove more valuable than providing an exceedingly polished set of functions that dont map as well to solving the problems your users are trying to solve.
 
posted by John Siegrist
 on September  3, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: August 20, 2007
 
Title: The Interrupt-Driven Life
 
After what seemed like years working in the Reddit isolation chamber, I begun saying yes to all the interesting projects that came my way as soon as I got out. And there were a lot of interesting projects.
 
I signed up to build a comprehensive catalog of every book, write three books of my own (since largely abandoned), consult on a not-for-profit project, help build an encyclopedia of jobs, get a new weblog off the ground, found a startup, mentor two ambitious Google Summer of Code projects (stay tuned), build a Gmail clone, write a new online bookreader, start a career in journalism, appear in a documentary, and research and co-author a paper. And thats not including all the stuff I normally do. Ive actually been spending most of my time catching up on my 2000 email backlog, reading a book a week, following a bunch of weblogs, and falling in love. (Falling in love takes a shockingly huge amount of time!) Yes, it has been pointed out to me that Im insane.
 
Clearly part of this is that I have some kind of severe psychological problem (an inability to say no, an inclination toward stress, and a nasty habit of coping with stress by submerging myself in new projects). But its not completely failing either. Every project has kind of half-finished. Maybe this is worthless, maybe instead of half-finishing thirteen projects I should just completely finish one. But it doesnt seem obviously stupid  a half-finished project has some value (educational if nothing else) and it seems increasingly likely that some of them will get finished properly.
 
So how is it that Im able to do so many tasks that even I, upon reflection, cant see how theyre all getting done? The secret is to be interrupt-driven. Previously, if I wanted to do something, Id immerse myself in that thing. Id wake up in the morning thinking about the problem, spend all day either working on it, reading background materials for it, talking to friends about it, thinking about it in bed before I went to sleep and then dreaming about it. Im sure I did much better work this way: all that thinking and dreaming led to lots of ideas I wouldnt have had otherwise. And it was fun, too. Immersing yourself in a problem can be very enjoyable. (See Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi.) But clearly, you can really only work on one problem at a time this way and it doesnt leave much room for other people in your life.
 
In the new system, for every task I have a partner. And theyre the one responsible for thinking about it. Perhaps they dont immerse themselves in it totally like I sometimes did, but it takes up a substantial portion of their mental energy. And so, after we hash out the big plan together at the beginning, they work on it and think about it and worry about it and when they get stuck or finish a piece or just want to talk about it, they shoot me an email. Meanwhile, I sit at home and just deal with these emails, answering questions and solving problems as they come up.
 
Now while I think giving people a partner on these projects is really valuable (I wish I had one on more of my immersive projects) Ill readily admit that Im lousy at it. Ive been spending too much time ill and traveling and with people in my life to respond promptly or in detail. (Im sorry guys; Im going to work hard to pare things down and do better.)
 
But I think the larger principle is valuable. This is clearly how the real big-shots get things done. Recall the scene in Brazil where the harried executive strolls purposefully (yet aimlessly) through the corridors with a trail of people waving papers behind him to which he barks either yes or no. (Reprised in last weeks Psych.) Of course, when things get that far, its rather unclear whos actually doing things. As with the political figure whose every minute is scheduled by their campaign manager or their chief of staff, one begins to wonder whether the others are working for the boss or whether the boss is simply working for them. In this way, moving up the corporate ladder means giving up more and more of your power and freedom.
 
At some point I plan to go back to the immersive life. I have some big plans that are just important enough to need that kind of dedication. But this is the year of Other People. I cant be everything to everyone, but Ill try my best to get things done.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August 20, 2007
 
Id be interested in the paper that you mention. Could you correct its URL? Thanks!
 
posted by FrF
 on August 20, 2007 #
 
Sorry, FrF, fixed.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August 20, 2007 #
 
Impressive, amusing and inspiring. 
BTW: What it takes to become a partner?
 
posted by Tzury Bar Yochay
 on August 21, 2007 #
 
Congratulations (I think). You are now Upper Management. That means you run around exchanging your whuffie for others labor, to mutually benefit each other.
 
Note the pattern:
 
And so, after we hash out the big plan together at the beginning, they work on it and think about it and worry about it and when they get stuck or finish a piece or just want to talk about it, they shoot me an email. Meanwhile, I sit at home and just deal with these emails, answering questions and solving problems as they come up.
 
grad student/thesis advisor
researcher/lab director
coder/project lead
etc.
 
Note, however, this doesnt work well for anyone who is not in a superordinate social position - otherwise, its just being overloaded with demands beyond control. Anyone who has had to deal with job/spouse/kids near-simultaneously can talk about being interrupt driven, and its no fun.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on August 21, 2007 #
 
And let me be the first to say Yay!, Aaron, to falling in love!  To quote Sir James M. Barrie: If you have it [Love], you dont need to have anything else, and if you dont have it, it doesnt matter much what else you have.
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on August 21, 2007 #
 
Love is over-rated, its a bad meme that society loves (pardon the pun) to purpetrate. Based on no scientific research I think most people fall in love with the concept of love rather than the person. And its this concept of love which like a parasite manipulates its host to further its own end - in this case being in love.
 
Dont get me wrong, Im not a cynic. Ive been in love lots of times, but Ive always found that I can always become out of love by simply concentrate on all the negative aspects of the relationship or person. Go on, try it if you dare - spend 20 days only thinking about the negatives and see what happens.
 
Love is nothing more than a perception disorder.
 
N
 
posted by N
 on August 24, 2007 #
 
I wonder if it would work in reverse: could you spend a mere 20 days thinking of the positives of all people and find at the end you loved them all?
 
posted by 
 on August 27, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: August  5, 2007
 
Title: Improving the Foo Camp Format
 
Ive been to several Foo Camps now and always the system has been identical: Get a bunch of meeting rooms of varying sizes. Invite a bunch of the top people you know of in the field. Have them write the schedule.
 
When you first arrive, Tim meets and greets at the door, his associates behind him ask for your name and give you a badge and a t-shirt and a short form to fill out. The form has your name on it and asks a few questions about what you do and who they should invite next year and that sort of thing. Then they take your photo and print it onto the top of the form and put all the forms up on the wall in a huge display that you have to be pretty tall to see all of.
 
You mingle as everyone arrives and then you all cram into a big meeting room. Tim and his compatriots give an opening address welcoming you to the conference and explaining the format. Then everyone (all 300 people or so!) stand up and say their name, affiliation, and three words to describe themselves (usually going over). Sometimes people shout talk when they think the person should give a talk. Then Tim says a few more words and they wheel out huge paper foam boards with the schedule outline printed on them. It lists the name of the room and the number of people it approximately holds at the top and the session times on the side. Then Tim says go and theres a mad scramble to the boards with people pushing each other out of the way to write down their preferred session.
 
This always struck me as a bit silly for a computer company. The people I most want to hear  like aging James Randi  cant exactly push their way to the front of the crowd. And the people who are convinced that their topic is the most important for everyone to go to are usually deathly boring.
 
How would I do it? First, I would put a few words of description on peoples badges and wall-cards. Second, I would put the wall-cards online. (Theyre digital photos anyway.) Third, during the name introductions Id point a video camera at the person introducing themselves and project it onto the big screen up front so that people dont flip around their chairs and crane to see.
 
But the main thing Id do is make people pitch for their sessions. There are a bunch of different ways to do this, but the one I like best at the moment (and thus the one Id try first) is to hand out PRS devices to the audience (these are little hand-held gadgets that send an IR pulse to a computer at the front of the room recording a vote on something) and then have all the people who want to hold a session form a line going towards the back of the room. Each person in the line gets 30 seconds to pitch their session. If people like it, they press a button on the PRS and their vote gets recorded. After the pitch, someone enters the presenter name, the session name, and the estimated length into the computer recording the votes. (If someone in the line wants to hold a similar session, they can consult with the person pitching and merge things.)
 
Once every session has been pitched, the computer does a constraint optimization problem to schedule only the most popular sessions in timeslots with the least conflicts (the computer knows if a person wants to see both James Randi and Eugenie Scott, so it can try to avoid having them speak at the same time) and place them in rooms with the appropriate amount of space. This schedule is printed up and placed on the website, maybe with a few spots reserved for last-minute changes, and this is what people follow.
 
Aside from being a really sexy use of constraint optimization, this solves a lot of problems: people get a little taste of every session, the most interesting sessions are scheduled, conflicts (wanting to see two sessions that are scheduled to the same time) are minimized, rooms are allocated by audience size instead of by ego size. If you want, you can even print up a schedule for each participant, with the computer telling them which is the session they liked most at every timeslot.
 
Buying a bunch of PRSs cant be that expensive  for comparison, Google purchased two nights at a hotel for every guest  and you can reuse them every year. If giving people a chance to pitch their sessions takes too long, you can have them submit a one paragraph description to a web site and let people vote on the web site. If this requires too many attendees have laptops with them, you can have them do this before the conference. But that requires more foresight than I expect the average attendee has, which is why I like the PRS system. Im not sure why OReilly sticks to paper.
 
Update: By email, Peter Kazanjy suggests another variation: have people write their session ideas up on cards, put the cards on the wall, then have everyone make a mark on their top five ideas, then schedule the cards and rooms based on how many marks they have.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August  5, 2007
 
Ive been on the outside looking in for a while on this foo stuff, and its interesting to see an analysis on the format.  Thanks.
 
However, this post also illustrates a frustration a wanna-be like myself has with foo:
 
Folks like yourself come out with perspectives on it, and it seems like nifty topics are bandied about, but I have no sense of what actually happens there and what it leads to.
 
Which is just a horrible tease.
 
At the same time I guess I see the point in losing dead weight like myself so the Illuminati can proceed forward with changing the world unhindered by the world thats to be changed.
 
So heres a solution (if you agree its a problem).
 Its quite similar to your PRS idea.
 
Have you ever seen Ken Goldbergs tele-robot dealio?
 
http://www.coe.berkeley.edu/forefront/fall02/telerobot.html
 
Essentially its a real-time choose-your-own-adventure style tour mashed with instant voting.  In all of Goldbergs demos at berkeley there were two actors, an attractive man and woman, dressed in skin tight suits all cyborged up with cameras and what not just walking around interacting with people, and they would be fed lines and instructions by some unruly mob on the net.
 
OReilly should have a few of these folks touring the Foo scene.  This would give us a tour bus through Foo in real time, which would be really cool, and you wouldnt even have to smell our cheeto breath.
 
Thoughts?
 
Regarding your PRS idea: if you want help implementing it with sensor networks (roughly 30 to 50 bucks a head), as opposed to IR, Id be more than happy to lend a hand.  Hell, it may actually get me an invite.
 
posted by Dan 
 on August  5, 2007 #
 
Sounds like a great thing to try out at a BarCamp or two, where you could likely use laptops or sms to vote. Wnat to hack something up for BarCampBlock?
 
http://barcamp.org/BarCampBlock
 
posted by Kevin Marks
 on August  6, 2007 #
 
The beauty of Sci Foo is the blend of chance and democracy.  It is true Brownian motion of thoughtful people picked by the organizers.  It seems the meeting is intended to force unscheduled or unintended meetings and associations by people. The Organizers have been careful to select participants  we should trust them.
 
By labeling everybody with their affiliations  Harvard this, or Microsoft that  you introduce an unnecessary filter.  The corporates will go to their sessions and the academics will flock together, etc.  There are lots of meetings like that.
 
I doubt every book Aaron has read was a masterpiece but I hope that every book he has read was instructive in some way and perhaps in an unexpected way.
 
posted by Hugh Rienhoff
 on August  6, 2007 #
 
Cool idea - Dan, Aaron, do you want to try this out at BarCampBlock? If you have time to hack something together before August 18, its coming up soon!
 
If you want to give it a try, write it up on the wiki - http://barcamp.org/BarCampBlock
 
posted by Liz Henry
 on August  6, 2007 #
 
The Foo audience repeatedly voted against letting outsiders have any form of access  video, audio, or textual.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August  6, 2007 #
 
Aaron,
 
I think youve proposed a great idea and also offered an excellent example; I just had the pleasure of hearing Mr. Randi speak this morning, in fact :).
 
Its not just the issue of physically pushing to the front, by the way, but the way that the current system rewards assertiveness, even aggressiveness and demotes the more humble.  Unfair and unfortunate all round.
 
I havent attended Foo and probably wont be invited to do so anytime soon, but I hope the Foo organizers respect and implement your idea.
 
posted by Adam
 on August  7, 2007 #
 
ezagraphe video de jennifer lopez follando pergnant girls porn        Ridingboots uk bord examination test for contractors state california com  - asus p4800s-x sound driver download mss monica geller s bridesmaids dresses maker plantyfish
 
posted by Sandra-aw
 on August 11, 2007 #
 
Peter Kazanjy suggests another variation:
  have people write their session ideas up
  on cards, put the cards on the wall, then
  have everyone make a mark on their top five
  ideas, then schedule the cards and rooms
  based on how many marks they have.
 
Hmm, thats about how we did it at Barcamp Nuremberg last year. Worked OK. But it was below 100 people. We also pre-voted for session interest by raising hands. Even less expensive than the gadget, but admittedly we still had to spent some minutes moving around the yellow notes on the whiteboard.
 
posted by Philipp Lenssen
 on August 13, 2007 #
 
gettin kinda spammy around here. maybe time to tidy up a bit.
 
posted by Dan Connolly
 on August 23, 2007 #
 
Session voting and optimization is a fine idea. As mentioned in a previous comment, using SMS may be an inexpensive and easy way to go.
 
I would like to see such meetings have some sort of loose goal (perhaps create one or more once the group is assembled). Again, pitches and quiet expressions of interest may help.
 
Offering suggestions for subsequent year invitees may be better toward the middle of the meeting instead of the beginning.
 
posted by Alan
 on September 14, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: August  4, 2007
 
Title: Sci Foo 2007 Gossip Liveblog
 
Industry heavyweights OReilly, Google, and Nature come together to sponsor a science-focused version of OReillys runaway success FOO Camp, bringing together top people in the field to eat and gab and plot. Our correspondent on the scene at Google headquarters in Mountain View and the conference hotel in Sunnyvale (where Google purchased a room for every attendee) will be providing live updates on the famous and their doings.
 
Martha Stewart is here with her boyfriend Charles Simonyi. Frank Wilczek is just as friendly in person as on TV. Dinner with Nat Torkington and Hal Varian. James Randi just told me to get glasses. Esther and Freeman are here  double Dyson decadence! Paul Sereno, Americas Most Photogenic Paleontologist looks photogenic in person too. Jaron Lanier seems to know everyone.
 
Kid looks past me to ask what the guy next to me does. I look miffed. He looks back at me and says well, come on, everyone knows your story.
 
Tim OReilly kicks things off by singing a duet of I Feel Good. Ted Selker gabs about our distractible mutual friend. Dean Kamen brags about the robots hes seen. Lee Smolin. Eugenie Scott gets a round of applause. Neal Stephenson and Kim Stanley Robinson are sitting together. Lots of comic book artists. Theodore Gray. Chris Anderson. Yossi Vardi says hi. Eric Drexler. Vik Olliver talks about his self-replicating 3D printers. Danny Hillis. George Dyson is also here. Sergey Brin says he likes neck stretches.
 
A quick glance makes it seem about 10% female, but Tim says its more like 23%.
 
Paul Sereno brought a bunch of fossils. Were not supposed to blog them until hes published. Drew Endy talks about domesticating biotech and a summer camp where college freshmen do their own biotech engineering. Felice Frankel shows series of brilliant science photos from her work with G. M. Whitesides and promotes imageandmeaning.org. Saul Griffith and Jim McBride show a series of diagrams to explain energy sources, paths, and usage. Charles Simonyi talks about his time in space. Martha Stewart talks about the food she made for him.
 
The hallways are full of people to talk to  I dont go for a minute before getting into a conversation. Kovas Boguta hints at his latest secret project. Sarah Brown catches up. The famed LH shares her inexhaustible supply of love. Daniel Chudnov of the Library of Congress introduces himself and tells me about the ten terabytes of data they have at Chronicling America. Brady Forrest tells me about the many conferences he worries about.
 
Martha saw one of her subordinates eat food thats been out too long and
worried that she would die of salmonella. Vaughan Bell tells me what its like to study people with psychosis and delusions. A group at breakfast wonders who is the Richard Feynman and Carl Sagan of our era. CSI has driven so many people into forensics that colleges have started whole new programs because of it  can we do the same for the rest of science? Science shows always show us at the university all day, one complains. How come they never show us at the pub or at meetings like this?
 
In one session a group of people discuss their citizen science projects  attempts to let normal people assist them with science. Others talk about visualizing data and transporting huge swaths of it. Google security is frighteningly helpful. Danny Hillis talks in the hallway about buying land for his clock. Jeff Hawkins talks about his neocortical theory. Eugenie Scott speaks on the attacks on evolution. Henry Gee on the Jewish community in London: People are shocked if their rabbi is not a practicing lesbian.
 
I signed up to give a talk.
 
At lunch there was a fellow working on genetically evolving robots, using a 3D printer to make the robots. Zach Kaplan of Inventables had a big bag at the table, from which he kept pulling out the most amazing things  squishy magnets, plastic that expands in water, instant snow, erasable pens, and so on. It was hilariously fun. On the way back in my old friend Chris Anderson said hi and plugged his new startup with the inimitable Adam Goldstein, BookTour. Adam  say hi sometime!
 
Theo Gray demoes Mathematica 6. Ted Kaehler, a lieutenant of Alan Kay, demoes the latest stuff from Squeakland, which has similar demos but for kids and with less elegance. (Dean Kamen got very interested; presumably for FIRST.) Bjrn Lomborg takes his Copenhagen Consensus show on the road. Hugh Reinhoff tells how he diagnosed his daughters congenital illness by sequencing her DNA to find the genetic mutation. (Harvard charges only $3.50 a reaction!) All the stuff you need these days is available on the Web, he explains. But the doctors get totally freaked out.
 
The Google buildings are almost mazelike.
 
George Dyson has a standing-room-only talk on Gdel and the Draft Board. (It was already moved to a larger room once.) The rest of the Dyson family and Martin Rees, President of the Royal Society, are among the numerous in attendance. George Dyson gives a madcap tour of Gdels attempts to become a full professor at the Institute for Advanced Study  a story of endless disappointments which Dyson manages to make quite funny. Its brilliant, if you can look past his standard bits of softheadedness. Freeman Dyson pipes in with stories from his Neal Stephenson notes that Gdel went on to work on lonely philosophical projects and George suggests that the open-ended freedom of the Institute was a bit of a mistake. Tim OReilly wonders if this is a more general lesson. I once paid Larry Wall a salary to do  basically whatever he wanted for a year, he said. I worry that it was the worst thing that ever happened to the Perl community, because that was when Perl 6 turned into what someone called a performance art project.
 
Martha Stewart fills a big room speaking on the Paperless Home. I may not look like it, she says, but Im the typical homemaker. I have a dog, I have a daughter, I have a garden, I have a farm, and I door I did it all myself. And as a homemaker, shes convinced homes need to become computerized. Not too computerized, of course  not like those crazy folks at MIT who want to have refrigerators that talk and coffee makers that do the same thing every day. Stewart wants to preserve traditions too. So shes going to build tools to organize the ultra-tedious tasks of life. Shes very bright, hard-headed, and engaging. So exhausting, says one woman upon the sessions conclusion. We pay people to do that sort of work.
 
Dalton Conley, the persecuted sociologist, and his arthack wife Natalie Jeremijenko gab at dinner. Dean Kamen gesticulates wildly and talks about watching beautiful women who bend down to pick things up. Nat Torkington discusses how OReilly refused to censor his video demonstration of New Zealand culture. Chris DiBona admits he just works at Google (as a grown-up!) so that he can do science tourism. Theo Gray shows me the 3D Table of the Elements he printed out using a lenticular.
 
The Internet here is really wonky.
 
Timo Hannay of Nature introduces himself and welcomes me, giving some clues as to why I was invited. He asks me to explain Science that Matters, which is an odd situation. My proud co-author Jim Hendler gives a talk on the future of science publishing. Paul Ginsparg ducks out to look at Howtoons, where Saul Griffith, who is dating Tims daughter Arwen OReilly, explains that they try to combine emotional stories to attract girls and action at a distance (guns, explodey-things, etc.) to attract boys, and telling the real stories behind discoveries to attract all. Theo Gray talks about the liability issues involved in publishing his Popular Science column. They made sure to get Judith Regan as their publisher so that they could print all sorts of dangerous stuff in their book, only to have her sacked because of the O.J. Simpson debacle. The conversation then devolved into explodey-things you can make at home. But the book should be out soon. It looks great.
 
The WiFi at the conference hotel adds ads to pages. Wow, is that annoying.
 
Eric Bonabeau apologized for being rude to me the other day and explained what his company does  predict human behavior based on modeling cognitive biases. Clearly people arent rational economic actors, he explained. Just look at Quinn Norton.
 
Someone whose name I didnt catch talks about finding which genetic differences increase your risk for getting a particular disease. To get 1x coverage of your genome from Celera costs only $100,000 and 23andMe hopes to do portions of your gene for $1,000. And just doing portions costs tens of dollars. You can browse the genome of Jim Watson and find the genetic mutations unique to him. Perhaps that mutation explains the extreme sexism, jokes Paul Ginsparg. He shows a large study of genetic risk factsors and examines Watson to see if hes at risk.
 
I give my talk. When I start, about 4 people are there, but I charge ahead and 15 or so more people show up. I give a demo of Open Library, which most people miss because they came late. Then we discuss how to open the scientific literature. Ginsparg says that studies have found that about a third of all papers, preferentially high-impact papers, are available for free online. We learn about the ways people keep online bibliographies (including the Drupal modules involved). And someone else suggests that the Wellcome Trust just buy Elsevier and open it up.
 
Natalie helps Dalton set up his computer for their joint session, in which they make somewhat opposite arguments. (They look much less cool when theyre wearing casual clothing.) He covers the problems in studying his book on birth order. He shows that blacks who were called for the draft are less likely to die in later years (which I was shocked about), which he proposes is because the military is the most color-blind institution (he suggests the black-white test score gap is smaller there too). He notes that womens groups prefer the voting records of politicians with daughters (for a potential natural experiment). Roommate lottery finds that each point loss in GPA costs you .25 points and that roommate drinking is a major influence. But once the effects are known, people adjust their social behavior. Thus social scientists are on a treadmill. Carl Bergstrom says he sees similar patterns in evolution  even if the animals are at a draw, you can see if the genome is under heavy selection.
 
Natalie talks about her Urban Space Station project which uses closed systems engineering to create safe urban spaces. Attached shell have a lab, one project of which is the Environmental Health Clinic, where people come with environmental problems and get prescriptions for things to do to help improve their world. One prescription: the greenlight.
 
I wanted to get into a fight with Dalton about the metareliability of these natural experiments but couldnt find him  he and Natalie were too busy taking care of two adorable children. At lunch I explained Open Library to some folks from Nature, then got involved in a discussion making fun of Stephen Wolfram with Chris DiBona and others. I learned the meaning of my Google New York shirt. Jim McBride told me how much he liked STM (which I saw on some other peoples feed readers) and invited me up to their abandoned air traffic control tower. Paul Ginsparg introduced me to Michael Kurtz of ADS.
 
Tim gives the closing speech: he wants to hear what new connections were made, thats his metric for success. Afterwards, I get in a great conversation with Carl Bergstrom who tells me about new features on his Eigenfactor site. Then I bump into Bjrn Lomborg, who is amazed I know about the Copenhagen Consensus. Hes been giving copies of his new book to everyone within throwing distance and stops to amicably persuade me that we should spend less on stopping global warming. Incredibly friendly guy  imagine the lead of Thank You For Smoking but a surfer. I talked to a lot of other people but I dont remember the details.
 
The Google people are packing up the camping tents and mats. Tamara Munzner demoes some of her visualization software. She gave me and others a ride. Ezez Lieberman told me about his work modeling versions of evolution in which strucural forces cause random drift to tie with fitness selection and his wife Aviva Presser told me about her work investigating methilation in gene sequences.
 
It was an incredible conference. Probably the best Ive been to (although thats not saying much).
 
View photos on Flickr.
 
Also, be sure to check out my comments on the Foo Camp format and suggestions for improving it.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August  4, 2007
 
Ahhhhhhgg how do you get invited to these things?!
 
posted by David McCabe
 on August  4, 2007 #
 
Its too early in the morning for me, but is this some kind of parody?
 
posted by Stephen
 on August  5, 2007 #
 
Nope, no joke :-)
 
posted by Chris DiBona
 on August  5, 2007 #
 
Thanks so much for blogging about this. I find it fascinating, and it renews my faith in society that so many great people like this can get together without a specific purpose in mind. Just let everyone get together and talk and chat and see what comes out of it.
 
Thanks for being the eyes and ears of those who werent invited!
 
posted by BJ Nemeth
 on August  5, 2007 #
 
Er, its not my data technically, its yours. :)  I just work with the folks who care and feed it.
 
Glad to meet you!
 
posted by dchud
 on August  5, 2007 #
 
A really nifty report, thanks!
 
Ive enjoyed reading Varian (and Shapiro) quite a bit lately.
 
Too bad for the low percentage of women there.
 
posted by Tommi
 on August  5, 2007 #
 
A very enjoyable liveblog; thanks for taking the time. Glad you like the con.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on August  6, 2007 #
 
Aaron 
 
A couple of comments.  The actual percentage of women in attendance was 23%, according to my quick look at the semi-final confirmed attendee list as of a week before the event.  While many people will complain the number of women is still too low (I think it is), but compare to the male/female ratio in papers in Nature and Science, and youll likely find it reasonably comparable.
 
I also want to clarify the comment I made about Perl (which Ive made previously in public.)  First, the statement about Perl 6 being a performance art project was not made by me.  It was made by a leading Perl programmer (not associated with OReilly) who shall remain nameless unless he wants to step forward, maybe five years ago.   Second, I think some nuance was lost.  Whenever Ive made this point about Perl, Ive expressed it as a worry, not an affirmative statement.  That is, Ive worried that it was bad for Perl that I took Larry from situations in which he had a day job in which he had to wrestle with real-world problems, and had that to drive the development of the language, and put him into a situation where he could deal with the language in the abstract.  I dont actually know the answer to whether that worry is justified or not (although the long wait for Perl 6 may suggest that it is.)  When Ive talked about that in the past, Ive always added I wouldnt necessarily bet against Larry, because hes a real genius, and Perl has resurrected itself again and again in the past.
 
This does remain an open question.  Often constraints are important.  (This also came up in the talk by Pete Worden at Nasa, who said (in his session about earth colliding asteroid response) that we could do an asteroid mission in 12-18 months if we really had to, versus ten plus years if we didnt.  But he also said that the easiest way to do this is with a really long view, so you have time to nudge things rather than doing something potentially catastrophic.)  So the real question is the right balance.
 
posted by Tim O'Reilly
 on August  6, 2007 #
 
Thanks for the corrections  Ive tried to fix things up. And thanks again for an amazing conference.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August  6, 2007 #
 
Aaron - I think the quote you took from me requires clarification. Only Liberal, Progressive Jews in London (and not all of those) would be shocked if their rabbi were not a practicing lesbian. I think its very important you mention that.
 
posted by Henry Gee
 on August  6, 2007 #
 
I dont knwo what other readers thought, but I assumed the bit about assuming ones rabbi would be a practicing lesbian was a joke caricaturing reality.
 
posted by Chris
 on August  7, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: August  1, 2007
 
Title: Consciousness Clarified
 
You ever notice how when you learn a new word you begin seeing it used everywhere? Lately Ive been feeling that way about consciousness. I knew the word before, obviously, but lately Ive clarified my thoughts about what it is and sloppy usage of the term sticks out like a sore thumb.
 
Consciousness, the dictionary kindly explains, is the state or condition of being conscious. And we all basically know what it means to be conscious. You poke someone awake and ask Are you conscious? You get hit on the head by a large rock and you get knocked unconscious. Being conscious, in short, means being awake, being aware of your surroundings, seeing colors and feeling pinches and hearing songs.
 
Now theres something weird about being conscious  something so weird, in fact, that Ive found many people are bizarrely tempted to deny it. Consciousness is what the philosopher John Searle calls ontologically subjective. That is, when you see the color red, while its true that all sorts of complicated things happen in your eyes and brains, a particular experience  the one we call seeing red  happens only to you. If aliens with the most powerful viewing technology possible beamed down to earth and peeked inside your brain, theyd still have no idea what the color red looked like. Theyd see that a certain wavelength of light triggered certain electrical impulses in certain centers, but theyd never see red. Its just not there.
 
Now we dont know for sure what causes consciousness (its an ongoing research project) but whatever the answer is, it must be caused by something. Yet this obvious fact is continually missed by laypeople who make bizarre comments like as soon as computers become self-aware, they might become conscious.1 This is as absurd as saying that as soon as computers are told about food, they might start digesting things.
 
Consciousness isnt some vague property of things that look smart to us. It has a real, physical meaning: feeling things. I suppose its logically possible that a talking robot might start feeling things, but the chances seem awfully remote.
 
Example: This weeks New York Times Magazine suggests a robot might exhibit the first glimmers of consciousness, namely, the reflexive ability of a mind to examine itself over its own shoulder.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
August  1, 2007
 
And not just laypeople: this is precisely the debate.
 
One side defines consciousness as the part of our minds which is not merely machine, thus by definition is something a computer could never have. The other side claims there is no such thing, that our entire experience of consciousness lies on the physical side of the mythical mind-body divide.
 
You seem to come down on the first side of this, by the usual method of stating that it is entirely obvious that consciousness is something else. You owe it to yourself to read Dennett, who I think at least makes it plausible to all that this need not be so.
 
posted by improbable
 on August  1, 2007 #
 
p.s. I might add that I find the use of the word consciousness for any robot we could build soon about as idiotic as you do.
 
There must be some grey area, encompassing newborn children and sheepdogs and dolphins. But certainly not slugs and jellyfish and lobsters.
 
posted by improbable
 on August  1, 2007 #
 
Have you been reading Nicholas Humphreys Seeing Red? He makes a big deal between the sensation of seeing red (redding, he sometimes calls it) and the perception of red. He has shown that some people with the usual bizarre kind of brain damage that these people love can perceive objects without the experience of seeing them (blindsight), so the two are different. He sees the evolutionary role of sensation as being to make us care about what we perceive - patients who can perceive without sensation tend not to make the effort to do so after a while.
 
Anyway, Im with you on the clarification thing, but with improbable on the something else thing - some of the time at least.
 
posted by tom s.
 on August  1, 2007 #
 
Aaron, please do yourself a favor and immediately start reading Douglas R. Hofstadters new book I Am a Strange Loop. It is the culmination of his decades of work exploring the nature of consciousness. The highly oversimplified version of his view is that consciousness arises from a representational systems of patterns, including a pattern of self and an ability to recursively cross levels of abstraction in these patterns.
 
Read the book already, its great.
 
posted by Ian
 on August  1, 2007 #
 
Consciousness isnt some vague property of things that look smart to us. It has a real, physical meaning: feeling things.
 
Im not really sure what youre trying to say here. It is surely real and physical but since everything in our universe is real and physical, thats a tautology. When you get punched in the head, the physical changes in the fist, skin, skull and nerves cause physical changes in your brain which the illusion that is you interprets as pain and shock and so on.
 
Saying I feel pain is useful shorthand for describing the physical state of the universe, in particular: the cells in your brain are arranged and firing in some particular way. Nobodys going to argue with that, just as nobody argues that fist is a useful shorthand for describing the bundle of bones, tissues, and blood at the end of someones arm balled up in a certain way.
 
Since this shorthand concept consciousness seems to be an emergent property of a sufficiently-sophisticated agent whose model of the world includes both representations of others models and of its own, I would frankly be pretty surprised if a robot could ever be built that was honest-to-goodness intelligent, without its also being conscious. Then again I have a pretty high bar for intelligent (passing one Turing test doesnt cut it).
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on August  1, 2007 #
 
If aliens with the most powerful viewing technology possible beamed down to earth and peeked inside your brain, theyd still have no idea what the color red looked like.
 
Or, maybe we just dont know enough about it yet. The conclusions that youre jumping to seem preposterous to me; why should we think that consciousness is ontologically subjective except for our own ignorance?
 
I for one expect consciousness to join planetary orbits and the origin of species in the list of great, formerly mysterious phenomena that we now understand. In the light of recent history, it seems like folly to say that anything is impossible to understand.
 
By the way, another concern I have with the views youve expressed previously is that they seem to imply that some special property of the universe was sitting around for fifteen billions years, waiting for us. Maybe that will turn out to be true, but it would be a reversal of the trend that weve seen in most major scientific discoveries.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on August  2, 2007 #
 
Add http://www.esgs.org/uk/art/sands.htm to your must read list.
 
It could make the dark things clear.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on August  2, 2007 #
 
Jamie,
 
Not everything that one might talk about is real and physical.  Real numbers, for instance, are neither real nor physical.  Yet we talk about them and describe their properties.  So Aarons statement is not tautological, though I think it is wrong for other reasons: A feeling is about as unreal and unphysical as something can get.
 
Also, wrt to your oblique assertion (a la Dennet) that consciousness is an illusion: This has always struck me as preposterous.  An illusion is what happens when ones senses are mislead into perceiving that which is not.  In other words, an illusion implies an observer.  So, you see, calling consciousness an illusion just begs the question.
 
posted by Mark
 on August  2, 2007 #
 
Searle is right, consciousness is ontologically subjective.  That is its most important  characteristic.  Interesting that you picked up on it :)  This doesnt explain consciousness but it gives us a place to start.  The brain processes observed from the outside are not observed (felt) the same as when you are that brain.  Lots of processes are like that  even motion through space, which looks quite different if you the thing moving.  If you think about it that way, its not quite so surprising.
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on August  2, 2007 #
 
improbable: I think I provided a pretty clear idea of what consciousness was without excluding the possibility of computers having it. Dennetts position seems, like most of his positions, completely unreasonable.
 
Mark: We believe things are consciousness both because of what they do and because of the mechanism they use to do it. We know that dogs are conscious because we know they have similar brains to us. Similarly, if I call your telephone and make your telephone say Im conscious! I see red! you still wont think your telephone is conscious.
 
Jamie: In the section you quote, I wasnt trying to say that consciousness was a physical fact as opposed to taking place in some other dimension. I meant it was a thing like digestion as opposed to a vague notion like intelligence. People often treat conscious like intelligent: perhaps someday this computer will be intelligent is a reasonable statement; perhaps someday this computer will be conscious is not so much.
 
Jamie claims that Saying I feel pain is useful shorthand for describing  cells in your brain  firing in some particular way. This is close to the Dennett/behaviorist position and I find it completely bizarre. Its true that every time one feels pain, a certain set of cells in your brain are firing in a pattern, but the pain is caused by that firing, its not simply that firing. If you pinch yourself, you wont just cause some neurons to fire  youll feel a pain in your arm. I dont have patience to spell this out in more detail, but if you still dont believe me, I recommend reading Searles discussion of behaviorism in The Rediscovery of the Mind and, more briefly, in Mind: A Brief Introduction and, briefer still, in The Mystery of Consciousness.
 
Meanwhile, David claims that if we knew more, we wouldnt think of sight as ontologically subjective. Im not sure what David expects us to learn. I cant think of anything we could possibly find that would communicate to aliens what the experience of red is like. And theres certainly no evidence that any such magical thing exists  it seems pretty clear that our brains are neuron firings and the like.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August  2, 2007 #
 
We know that dogs are conscious
 
We do?
 
Perhaps someday this computer will be intelligent is a reasonable statement; perhaps someday this computer will be conscious is not so much.
 
I dont see how you can say that until we thoroughly understand what consciousness is and what causes it! Consciousness is possible in this universe. But we dont know what causes it. So how can you be so sure that computers cant possess it?
 
I have no idea what we might learn. Neither do you. Keep an open mind. And after clarifying for us that experience is not the same as the neurological systems that cause the experience, I find your last statement pretty bizarre. Im not waiting for some whole new aspect of the universe to be revealed. Im just saying that the future hasnt happened until it happens.
 
Instead, wasnt it you who was saying that something physical about the brain itself causes consciousness? Your assertion that neurons can experience consciousness, but transistors or marbles* cannot, seems to imply an lan de conscience much more than anything I have said here.
 
By the way, when you email somebody your reply to them, you really should put it into second-person.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on August  3, 2007 #
 
David is attacking a straw man. I never said computers or marbles cant possess consciousness.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August  3, 2007 #
 
Youre partially right; I did incorrectly remember what you said before. Slightly.
 
http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/searle
 
By the way, Im getting packet loss and slow responses from your server. Might want to look into it.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on August  3, 2007 #
 
Why do you need to bring aliens into the picture? For the subjective experience you refer to as seeing red, other humans cant experience it either. Imagine aliens that have the technology to take human eyes and incorporate them into their own anatomies. Does that give them the ability to have the same subjective experience as humans?
 
posted by ThomasW
 on August  3, 2007 #
 
None of this seems that hard to me. A mental model is a (necessarily very) abridged map of some collection of probabilities in time-space. Living creatures evolved to the point where they needed good mental models of not only their environment (to avoid the quicksand), not only the other creatures mental models (to guess what the lion is going to do next), but every human around them including themselves (to guess whos going to help or screw over whom). Just as the creatures are benefited by sensing pain, they are benefited by sensing that they are a continually-existing singular conscious entity moving forward in time. It seems clear that this belief in our own consciousness is an evolutionary advantage in a socially-rich environment of long-lived agents: my ancestors without it probably couldnt have been as concerned about making long-term goals with the aim of survival and reproduction.
 
Its hard to have a fair discussion about this. Every response to this thread has talked about I, we, you, which presuppose there is something real and physical about the referents of those pronouns. Just as pi refers to the concept of a ratio of an ideal circles circumference to its diameter and does not actually exist in our universe, I refers to a very complex collection of symbol-manipulating mental models being run like a tinkertoy computer by the physical matter inside my skull. Its shorthand that we cant really live without because we are these things. Pi is an emergent property of elementary geometry, and I am an emergent property of physics. Once we all agree on that point we can start having a meaningful conversation about consciousness.
 
Ill put the Searle books on my reading list, but I doubt Ill be all that impressed; the Chinese room thought-experiment is founded on a severe, I would say laughable, misunderstanding of the relationship between brains and minds. My reaction to reading about it for the first time was surely this isnt what passes for philosophy about the mind nowadays, its so stupid and so Ive never been interested in reading more Searle. (I think I first read of it in The Minds I; I would have been 11 or 12.)
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on August  3, 2007 #
 
Why do you need to bring aliens into the picture? For the subjective experience you refer to as seeing red, other humans cant experience it either. Imagine aliens that have the technology to take human eyes and incorporate them into their own anatomies. Does that give them the ability to have the same subjective experience as humans?
 
posted by EKoL
 on August  4, 2007 #
 
Aaron,
 
if seeing red is something more than neurons firing, then why is that my patient last week with a stroke in the occipital lobe cant see in an as yet not entirely defined region of his visual field? He was alert and oriented to time person and place and has no evidence of pathology between from the film of tear overlaying his eye all the way back through the optic nerve, the optic chiasm, the radiations, and into the occipital lobe?
 
The information isnt being processed. What is not being informed? His soul? His consciousness? Wernickes area is still intact: he has the word red. Brocas area is intact: he can construct sentences and use the word red appropriately. The biological deficit is in a part of the brain further from the eye, logically, than the banks of the calcarine sulcus, specifically a huge area of white matter in the occipital lobe.
 
The biological its neurons model has proven better than any other model, since Cahal, in explaining psychiatric and neurologic illnesses (like strokes that involve virtually every element of consciousness) and the effectiveness of treatments that are used. It explains the stages of development. It is more thoroughly tested than any other model and has held up to innumerable experiments.
 
If you maintain that red is not in the neurons, you will need to explain why hormones and psychoactive chemicals effect thought processes, explain the repetitive pattern of thought changes that follow spatially similar strokes. You will need to explain color blindness. And you will need to advance an alternative explanation.
 
I think, if anything, the word is misleading. Like Open Source software, conciousness is an umbrella term of convenience, its scope makes it inherently resistant to testable definition.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on August  5, 2007 #
 
I just ran across this while reading your scifoo post. Ask your fellow scifoo camper Jeff Hawkins about red. Heres his TED talk
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on August  5, 2007 #
 
And another TED talk: Dan Dennett
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on August  5, 2007 #
 
Jamie accurately points out that living creatures need[] good mental models of their environment, themselves, and others. But then he says this amounts simply in a belief in our own consciousness. I tried to show that consciousness isnt simply a belief, its a real physical process that has to be addressed.
 
And, for what its worth, those Searle books are vastly superior to the Chinese Room, which Searle never saw as fit enough to publish in a real book (my sense is that hes a tad embarrassed of it).
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August  6, 2007 #
 
Imagine aliens that have the technology to take human eyes and incorporate them into their own anatomies. Does that give them the ability to have the same subjective experience as humans?
 
Of course not. Human eyes just convert light into electrical impulses,
like web cams. Plugging a web cam into a computer doesnt give it any
particular subjective experience.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on August  6, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: July 18, 2007
 
Title: Fear and Loathing: A Correction
 
The other week in a post titled Fear and Loathing in Biotechnology Firms, I wrote:
 
Hey there! said the scientist. Hi, said the bored-looking African-American woman behind the desk.
 
In response, I recently received the following comment from a poster who goes by the name I WAS THERE THAT NIGHT:
 
Im not a large african american woman, and there was no desk. Your facts are incorrect, and you looked very very scared that night, my friend.
 
Id like to take this moment to correct the record. Upon reflection, security sat behind a barrier that was indeed tall enough to make it a counter and not a desk. We at Raw Thought deplore the casual use of language that causes many speakers to conflate counters with desks and we strive for precision in these matters. We deeply regret the error.
 
Id also like to take this moment to correct another error. The same article suggests the same so-called desk was reached after ducking into a door. After a further review of notes by the author, we have concluded that it was not actually a door, but more of a small hallway leading to several doors, really a kind of alcove actually.
 
I hope this post underscores our commitment to facts at Raw Thought. We continue to stand by our claims that journalists noses look bigger while on drugs, that giant vats of transgenic corn cure cancer, that CostCo is authentically historic, and that Genentech is the Best Company to Work For in America. We can only hope that its employees continue to read our quality content.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 18, 2007
 
Ah, I take it shes a small african-american woman?
 
posted by David McCabe
 on July 19, 2007 #
 
Factssmacts. It was an entertaining read nonetheless. [Contrary to what one may think after my comment on the originaly post.]
 
posted by ged
 on July 19, 2007 #
 
fun
 
posted by funny
 on July 24, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: July 16, 2007
 
Title: Announcing the Open Library
 
Early this year, when I left my job at Wired Digital, I thought I could look forward to months of lounging around San Francisco, reading books on the beach and drinking fine champagne and eating foie gras. Then I got a phone call. Brewster Kahle of the Internet Archive was thinking of pursuing a project that Id been trying to do literally for years. I thought long and hard about it and realized I couldnt pass this opportunity up. So I put aside my dreams of lavish living and once again threw myself into my work. Just as well, I suppose, since San Franciscos beaches are freezing cold, champagne has a disgusting taste, and foie gras is even worse.
 
I thought of the smartest programmers and designers I knew and gave them a ring, sat down for coffee with them, threatened to fly out to their homes and knock on their doors. In the end, we got together an amazing group of people  all sworn to secrecy of course  and in the past few months weve put together whats probably the biggest project I ever worked on.
 
So today Im extraordinarily proud to announce the Open Library project. Our goal is to build the worlds greatest library, then put it up on the Internet free for all to use and edit. Books are the place you go when you have something you want to share with the world  our planets cultural legacy. And never has there been a bigger attempt to bring them all together.
 
I hope youll take a look and let me know what you think. And if this project excites you the way it excites me, I hope youll join us.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 16, 2007
 
What a shame that .pdf is in the mix. Its a complete nightmare, especially for blind folks.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on July 16, 2007 #
 
Congrats, Aaron! This is very exciting. Im going to add some metadata from the books Im reading right now.
 
posted by Steve Jenson
 on July 16, 2007 #
 
Wow!  Pretty cool.
 
William, many of the recent updates to screen readers have pdf support.
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on July 16, 2007 #
 
How does this relate to Project Gutenberg?
 
posted by Sean Foy
 on July 16, 2007 #
 
Woah baby.  Way to go Aaron, this looks immense.
 
Amazon is NOT the place to store information on the worlds books!
 
Brilliant.
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on July 16, 2007 #
 
Will it be anything like Scribd.com or not in the same category?
 
posted by Pete
 on July 16, 2007 #
 
Smashing idea-great books, or even good books, depending on ones taste, should be available to everyone who wants to read them.  Literacy and books are a big deal.  Nice piece of work, so far, Swartz
 
posted by Mike 
 on July 16, 2007 #
 
I like it. Markdown looks simple enough that writers will use it for their ordinary work, which can then be formated as they wish. HTML is a bit awkward for that.
 
Two suggestions to think about:
 
Some Guides, like Popularity, could come directly from usage. Other Guides could be run by organizations, such as scholarly societies, philosophical groups, political parties, corporations, or governments  whoever runs it would control the content of that Guide. Anyone could set up a new Guide, though only a limited number would get enough momentum to be widely useful, by having credible recommendations on many of the books in their field. Each Guide might appear to the end user as a personality (think of spirit guides), though almost always a Guide will be a group creation.
 
Hopefully 3rd-party sponsors will buy hundreds of prepaid free downloads at a time, because they like the book, like the author, like the movement or cause  and/or want to send their own short message or ad targeted to people anywhere who like them. Note that the click fraud problem largely disappears with this kind of targeted ad.
 
All my work is rights-free for anyone to use at http://www.smart-accounts.org
 
posted by John S James
 on July 16, 2007 #
 
WOOPS  my suggestions are each two paragraphs and need the obvious formating help. Also, #2 needs the correct number.
 
John
 
posted by John S James
 on July 16, 2007 #
 
Congratulations on launching the Open Library, Aaron. This looks like an amazing project. (And youve answered the question I had about what you were going to tackle next. :-))
 
posted by Paul Kim
 on July 16, 2007 #
 
Aaron, I take back all the annoyed thoughts I ever had at you.  This is way cool.
 
posted by Matt C
 on July 17, 2007 #
 
How does this relate to Project Gutenberg?
 
Its a copycat.
 
posted by mynameishere
 on July 17, 2007 #
 
How does this relate to Project Gutenberg?
 
OpenLibrary had a result for the book I looked up, Project Gutenberg did not.
 
Not a knock against Project Gutenberg, but theres definitely a place for OpenLibrary.
 
posted by andeezy
 on July 17, 2007 #
 
Project Gutenberg had a result for the book I looked up, OpenLibrary did not.
 
Not a knock against OpenLibrary, but theres definitely a place for Project Gutenberg.
 
posted by Pete
 on July 17, 2007 #
 
Congrats on getting this out there  and at an early stage!
 
posted by mako
 on July 17, 2007 #
 
What a revolutionary fucking idea!  Imagine.  Using the internet to store books.  Never crossed my mind before.  Has anyone ever tried this before?
 
Lets see now; how long do copyrights last?  About the lifetime of the author, then the lifetime of the authors heirs, then the lifetime of the authors hers heirs.  Ever try to find a poem by Langston Hughes online?  I tried, and apparently, his estate doesnt take too kindly to freely dispersing his works to all.
 
Well, if one can become a billionaire these days by writing nonsense I dont see much hope.
 
P.
 
posted by P.
 on July 18, 2007 #
 
isnt this exactly what google books is???? i dont get what the difference is.
 
posted by MK
 on July 18, 2007 #
 
Wow, first reddit (and even more before) and now this - very cool. Good luck with this, and its definitely there on my radar along with The Gutenberg Project and the Internet Archive. Thanks for doing this. Very cool.
 
posted by Timothy Washington
 on July 19, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: July 10, 2007
 
Title: Fear and Loathing in Biotechnology Firms
 
I was sitting with my journalist and reading Fear and Loathing when I noticed that things werent seeming the way Id become accustomed to them seeming. For one thing, my journalists nose seemed a fair sight bigger than one would expect a nose to be, even accounting for taste, while her eyes seemed to be moving back and forth in her head as if they werent quite sure whether they preferred it in or out.
 
Still, I shouldnt criticize. I suspect I didnt look my usual self either, what with my head making those small wobbly notions on my neck and my leg vibrating back and forth as if it were thinking very hard about something. Why it was forced to work as my leg, supporting me all the time while i gave it no consideration in return, perhaps.
 
As I finished the book I slammed it down on the desk, causing a couple other books to fall off the side. We must rent a very fast car, I demanded, before scrunching up my face in an inevitably doomed attempt to get a look at myself. I didnt normally sound like this.
 
My journalist agreed, so we popped some pills and picked up a BMW. It was a little past midnight at the time, so you could hardly notice the cars nasty habit of accelerating right up to the edge of other cars, stopping hard a couple inches before it hit them.
 
We must find a heart of darkness, said my journalist. I just looked at her. She continued mumbling about a heart of darkness while stepping on the accelerator. I decided to look away. She continued to make friends with the accelerator. Ive got it she shouted, wrenching the car around, Vacaville!
 
My journalist assured me that Vacaville was a small city outside San Francisco filled with giant vats of transgenic mutant corn that cured cancer. I wasnt quite sure what any of that really was, let alone which part of that was a heart of darkness. My fears were not allayed when we pulled off the freeway under a giant light-up sign that said Authentic Historic Vacaville, only to see a couple 7-11s and a CostCo. We got back on the freeway.
 
The next time we got off the freeway, there were a dozen industrial buildings with sinister yellow lighting belching vast plumes of smoke into the air. We ditched the car behind a tree, dropped our wallets and identification in it, and, arm-in-arm, begun strolling through a place which had even less claim to the title of Authentic Historic Vacaville.
 
In 2006, the leading biotechnology firm Genentech was named the number one Best Company To Work For by Fortune Magazine. I suppose this incredible allure could explain why the companys campus was surrounded by barbed wire. It did not, however, explain why the barbed wire was facing in.
 
There are a couple of ways to get into the Genentech campus. You can climb the barbed wire fence. You can swipe an ID badge and go through the imposing metal turnstiles. You can drive past the guard at the main gate and show some kind of ID. Or you can find the side gate that they forgot to lock and open it. My journalist didnt want to scratch her pants, so we used the side gate.
 
And that was how we found ourselves strolling in the moonlight around the factories of a leading biotechnology firm.
 
This place is incredible, my journalist said, as we approached it. Construction worker, I said, as I spotted a man walking through the corridors of the empty new building. We continued walking around it.
 
Im always morally torn by major biotech companies, she explained. Smoke break, I said, as the construction worker stepped outside the building and paused.
 
On the one hand, this place makes drugs that save peoples lives  treatments for cancers and cystic fibrosis and asthma, she told me. Heading out, I told her, as the construction worker walked across the campus towards the gate.
 
And yet, on the other hand, this place is pure evil. We walked past large vats labeled Poison and huge machines that looked like they could crush us. Smoke belched from the top of the building and we could see more buildings and a parking lot in the distance.
 
Companies like this are made up of dozens of people, each of whom, individually, are the sweetest guys. Nice, friendly people who just care about doing well at their work. As we approached the buildings, we saw that even now  2AM  the place was alive. New cars were pulling into the lot and men and women were walking from building to building. The yellowed light on their white lab coats gave the whole thing a sinister air.
 
And yet, together, they manage to pull off the most incomprehensible evils. I was about to join her discussion of organizational sociology when I heard a go-kart pull up behind us.
 
Excuse me, said the man in the go-kart. Do you folks work here?
 
I was about to come up with some explanation but my journalist dodged in front of me and saved me the trouble.
 
No, sir, she said, with complete sincerity.
 
Do you have visitors badges? asked the man, sounding a bit puzzled.
 
Definitely not, she said.
 
Are you supposed to be here?
 
No way. Actually, we were just going for a stroll when we found ourselves in this bizarre place. We were wondering if you could tell us how to get out.
 
The man in the go-kart thought about this for a while before getting out of the kart and walking towards us. As he stepped into the light I could see he was wearing a bright orange vest.
 
Huh, well the fastest way to get out of the facility from here is probably to walk through the entire campus, he explained.
 
Oh, I see, said the journalist. Well, could you escort us off the premises then? she asked. I restrained myself from kicking her.
 
The man in the vest looked back at the go-kart, where his partner was sitting. Nah, my theres no more room in the kart, he said.
 
Oh, well then maybe you could take us to security? she said. I dug a small hole in the ground, placed my foot into it, then used the other foot to fill it back up with dirt in a vain attempt to stop myself from kicking her.
 
Im actually not allowed to take you guys to Genentech security, he said. See, Im over with construction. One of my men came by and told me that he saw to people walking around the premises, so I just came to check it out. He thought about this for a while. Let me see if I can find you someone, he said.
 
And that is how we got a burly man in a bright orange vest to escort us onto the Genetech campus, a series of industrial buildings facing a shared quadrangle of matted grass, with some concrete sidewalks laid across it. The whole thing looked a bit like a college campus, I suppose, if the colleges buildings had been designed to look like some kind of sci-fi bubble city. Through the windows one could spy huge machines with many levers dials and large vats that stuff was being oozed into and out of.
 
People entered and exited the buildings in a hurried manner, and one scientist, a frazzled-looking man with a redheads beard and an orange t-shirt reading got juice?, crossed the path in front of us.
 
Excuse me, said the man in the vest, his manly striding posture suddenly becoming bowed and deferential before the frazzled scientist. I found these people who got lost wandering around the campus, he explained, as if it was a question. Do you think you could try to get them home?
 
Oh, sure! said the scientist, genial and alive as a carnival barker, as if he made a habit of wandering around the Genentech campus at 2 in the morning looking for people to take back to their cars.
 
Thanks so much, said the man in the vest, before scurrying back to his go-kart.
 
The scientist reached for a walkie-talkie from his back pocket. Security, are you there? Security? he said and paused. The radio crackled. This is security, it finally replied. Where are you? he asked. There was a pause. Then a crackle. What?
 
Are you in your office? Pause, crackle. Um, yeah.
 
OK, be there in a bit.
 
And that was how a Genentech scientist badged us into the facility and begun taking us through its corridors.
 
So what do you do here? I asked, as if making conversation.
 
Oh, we, um, make drugs to treat breast cancer, he explained.
 
Yeah, right, my journalist whispered in my ear. Awful big facility just for treating breast cancer.
 
What do you do? I asked. Oh, Im a scientist here.
 
Oh, really? A scientist? Heh, I always imagined scientists wandering around in big white labcoats carrying beakers, I joked. Oh, we do, he said with utter sincerity. Actually, I just took my lab coat off  if you guys had been here a couple minutes earlier I would have been wearing it.
 
We wandered past hallways labeled with Genentech propaganda and stopped right before the company cafeteria, ducking into a door to find the desk for security.
 
Hey there! said the scientist. Hi, said the bored-looking African-American woman behind the desk.
 
Um, these two folks got a bit lost wandering around the neighborhood and I was wondering you could help get them out of here.
 
The security womans eyes widened. What? she shouted. You brought random strangers in here? They cant be in here! You cant just bring people in here!
 
Well, I just figured I ought to take them to security and you guys could help them out.
 
Help them out? Help them out? Im not allowed to leave this desk, she cried. Oh, they cant be in here. You gotta get rid of these guys.
 
Oh, okay, said the scientist, completely unfazed. Well, Ill walk them back to their car.
 
Yeah, whatever, she said dismissively. You just do what you gotta do, cause they cant be in here.
 
And that was how a Genentech scientist took us through the building, past offices, through the loading dock, out the back past more industrial equipment, a running commentary all the way.
 
Howd you guys get in here? asked the guard at the gate as we walked past him. Hed obviously heard about us. Oh, my journalist said, it was open. We just walked in. The guard just laughed and waved.
 
The scientist asked where we were from, just in the spirit of making conversation. My journalist explained that we were from San Francisco and wed decided it was a nice night for a casual stroll, so we had been walking around Vacaville. The scientist nodded approvingly, as if he always ran into cityfolk who came out for a stroll around Vacavilles office parks at 2 in the morning.
 
Soon wed located our car and said our goodbyes. The scientist waved goodbye at us and we tried to stifle our giggles until we got back to the car.
 
At moments like these, which seem to stand outside of space and time  middle of nowhere, middle of the night  one thing remains constant: Dennys. Always open, with decor that hasnt changed since its founding in the 1960s, a diner like Dennys is a perfect place to go to make sense of it all. But none of it makes any sense at all; there is nothing to do but lay your head down on the table and puzzle at a world that is more strange than you can possibly imagine.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July 10, 2007
 
Hahaha, wonderful :)
 
posted by Winsmith
 on July 10, 2007 #
 
If Dennys cooks were as good as their photographers nobody would eat anywhere else.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on July 10, 2007 #
 
Loved it! Looking forward to more writings like these Keep exploring!
 
posted by MT
 on July 10, 2007 #
 
Why are biotech firms evil?
 
posted by Nelson Madiba
 on July 10, 2007 #
 
Ive read Hunter S. Thompson. You, sir, are no Hunter S. Thompson.
 
posted by ged
 on July 10, 2007 #
 
ged: give aaron a break. it was our first or second field trip. to be fair, he does continue hsts tradition of playing the whole thing down a bit.
 
posted by quinn
 on July 10, 2007 #
 
sheesh. some people have no sense of humor.
 
posted by ged
 on July 10, 2007 #
 
found via reddit. great read, keep it up.
 
posted by foo
 on July 11, 2007 #
 
Im not a large african american woman, and there was no desk.  Your facts are incorrect, and you looked very very scared that night, my friend.
 
posted by I WAS THERE THAT NIGHT
 on July 15, 2007 #
 
Great reading here, BTW I found this site from wikipedia. &nbsp 
Games
 
posted by Yagle
 on July 24, 2007 #
 
Ignorance, trying to be edgy.
 
posted by feh
 on August  1, 2007 #
 
You were never there this is a weak hallucination or a retroviral overdose
 
posted by malcolm
 on August  1, 2007 #
 
This tries to be funny, but I found it difficult to laugh.  Between the lines I saw an ugly ooze of prejudice that turned my stomach.  But dont worry folks, its ok. Its hip prejudiceprejudice against pharmaceutical companies.  It used to be equally hip to be prejudiced against gays and african-americans.
 
Ok, there is one funny partclearly the author has no concept of what Genentech is.  Its actually one of the last pharma companies you would characterize negatively.  The people there go to work every day, thrilled to be saving lives and improving the world.  Sure, lets criticize that.
 
posted by Eric
 on August  1, 2007 #
 
I am convinced such paranoia and bigotry must be the result of an education system that is successful only in developing and nurturing inflated-self-worth and willful ignorance.
 
This author could be the poster child for the 49th percentile.
 
posted by Ramrod
 on August  6, 2007 #
 
I must say the comments are excruciatingly funny. They remind me of someone I encountered at the Constructing Scientific Ignorance talk by Robert Probst. As I hurried in late, an expensively dressed, blow-dried couple was leaving. I asked if I was in the right place. The man replied, Yes, if you want to listen to people who want to DESTROY INDUSTRY! (Emphasis mine)
 
An ugly ooze of prejudice indeed. Are these people your friends Aaron?
 
posted by Bob Calder
 on August  7, 2007 #
 
Wow wow wee.  Why dont you schedule a meeting with Genentechs PR and ask to take a tour?  Why dont you interview the patients that survived from the cancers they beat using Genentechs medications before you and your journalist make assumptions?
 
And yet, together, they manage to pull off the most incomprehensible evils.really? The incomprehensible evils produced from the Vacaville site are the foosball players. Im serious, they are wickedly good.  There is one player from there that has this pull shot. Its so good that he said he sold his soul to the devil to acquire the shot.  And theres this other guy with a sinister bank shot. His 5 man bank shot can be classified as  a huge machine(s) that looked like they could crush us.
In the end, we can safely concur with Helen Momma Boucher, Foosball is the devil!
 
posted by Choclate Rain Man
 on August 21, 2007 #
 
How can you say that biotech is evil without any explanation?  You offer no proof, no evidence, nothing at all to back up your claim.  Are they evil for making cancer curing drugs?  Are they evil in the way they escorted you through the building?  I dont follow you at all.  You simply say that biotech in evil, which is an unsubstatiated opinion.  I can do what you do:
 
Milk is evil.
Chair is evil.
Lamp is evil.
I love lamp.
 
posted by Perry Carter
 on August 21, 2007 #
 
I work at said biotech firm and you have a lot more facts that are outright lies.  There are no vats that are labeled poison, there is no inward facing barbed wiresure there is a fence and security, its a facility that costs half a billion dollars and corporate espionage has actually happened in this industry.  Secondly you are extremely lucky you didnt get arrested for trespassing on private property.  Thirdly, check out Genentechs philanthropic endeavors.  Also note that were an extremely liberal company who emphasizes social and racial equality.  Were rated one of the best companies for working mothers, even offering onsite day care to employees needing such services.  Youre shortsighted and illegal adventure is not only a lie but also moronic and childish at best.
 
posted by dumb dumb dumb
 on August 21, 2007 #
 
yes I work here too and I really suck at foosball.  Its the DEVIL!!!
 
posted by Darren C. from CCM
 on August 21, 2007 #
 
The things that is so doing my head in, lovely people from Genentech, is that you were all lovely. Aaron made a point of it, as well. Maybe you thought of it as sarcastic, but it wasnt at all. Even the ones that really were annoyed were lovely, and the man who took time out to help us was amazing. Individually, I doubt there was anyone there that wouldnt have ripped out their own beating heart to help someone in need. And you all were happy, well treated, etc. The heavenliness of it was part of what made it so intense and, to some degree, distressing.
 
Pharma companies like Genentech make drugs that have personally saved my life. Thats where my ambivalence comes from- for every me there are a bunch of people in the world that dont get treated due to business decisions, logistics, etc. Theres a myriad of ways it comes about, and subtle critiques of why it happens, but Im left with that human moment of knowing how it feels to be sick and without hope. The pharma angel descended on me. Maybe its the survivors guilt, maybe its the belief that we could collectively do better, but it leaves me heartsick.
 
So how does it happen? How do oil companies keep the world going and destroy the climate all at once? How do people as nice and generous as you add up to doing horrible as well as wonderful things? Why does it seem like sometime you can add more lovely people and end up with more terrible acts? And what, if anything, can we do about it? Its like a mythical man month of morality.
 
So there was fear, we were scared out of our wits at times. And there was loathing, for, like you, ultimately being in the middle of this thing we dont understand and cant get out of. And like you, were basically good people that get misunderstood sometimes.
 
There are huge vats labeled poison. I believe its required by law on corrosives.
 
(The barbed wire facing in comment was actually a miscommunication. That was my high school in LA, not the Genentech campus.)
 
posted by The Journalist
 on August 21, 2007 #
 
One more thing, dagnamit.
 
Going to the nearest Dennys at 2am, ordering a coffee, and laying your head on the table for 45 minutes isnt how one celebrates a triumphant prank or sticking it to the man or any such nonsense.
 
Dennys coffee is the best drink for realizing late at night you are another blind man feeling an elephant. That night, we also came to understand that we werent just blind, we were tied to the elephant.
 
posted by The Journalist
 on August 22, 2007 #
 
Aaron Swartz is the devil.  Damn the man who pops pills, goes for a fast ride and risks everyones life on the freeway for his own selfish adventure.  Damn the man who lies for his own reportless ability.  Aaron Swartz, your a fake.
 
posted by Jerk
 on August 22, 2007 #
 
Sure we make profits, were a company in a capitalist system.  Thats how we survive.  The expenses the public sees is from the raw material used to create the life altering drugs.  You look at one component and see that it costs us over five hundred dollars and we must use fifteen of them every other day and then throw them away after one use and you wonder why we charge so much?  Furthermore what is the price of human life?  If were such an evil organization bent on milking the world, then why would anyone take our products?  The reason is that they save lives.  They stop cancer from growing and they work.  If you really think were so evil and even have the audacity to compare us to oil companies who have nine billion dollars in profit each quarter for a product with inelastic demand, then honestly you dont care about the peoples fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, sons and daughters that we have helped live longer lives.  You honestly dont care about the humans who live to breath another day, who enrich their familys life another minute.  The problem with liberal politics (coming from a democrat this sounds funny) is there shortsightedness.  You see only what we charge, but you never attempt to place, or you do with fleeting desire, your minds around the costs to bring these products to market and their ultimate effects.  Our biggest dreams are to be able to go out of business.  To be able to eradicate cancer, but seeing as how cancer is in fact your very own body with mutated DNA, the chances of that happening are slim.  So we are dedicated to the treatment of such a disease and the ability to give a dying person more time with their families, possibly even a lifetime more.  In short, you two and your ilk are the real evil, the real enemies of the millions of people who are dying out there.
 
posted by RE: The Journalist
 on August 22, 2007 #
 
Please understand my point of view; the entire medical field doesnt save even a significant fraction of the lives evil oil companies save.
 
If they stopped, it would all shut down, the lights would go out, and wed die. Wed end up eating each other in darkened besieged streets if oil companies didnt aggressively, sociopathically, seek out their product, take it from whoever is on top of it, and get it to market efficiently. Id like to think I boycott Exxon, but of course I dont. If I owe Pfizer my life 5 times over, I owe Exxon my life 1000 times over.
 
That leaves me ambivalent. If you look at the time stamp on this post, youll see it leaves me ambivalent late into the night.
 
You say yours is a company doing what it has to to survive in a capitalist system; that is what I was saying. We are interdependent. We rely on companies like Genentech to make us drugs, you rely on us waving our insurance cards indiscriminately when we feel bad. Ideologies aside, however evil you may think we are, youre still going to take our money, and our insurance companys money. Were still going to take your drugs. I think we can all agree insurance companies are evil, but again, Id be dead and youd be unemployed without them. None of us are ready to defect from this system.
 
I think its hard to find evil. Every time you try to nail it down, everything gets hopelessly complex. I think this is kind of what the banality was about. Its not the Jack the Rippers of history that do great evil, its not even the bad leaders. The bad men of history never killed millions of people, they created systems, and then ordered the system to go do it. I dont think Genentech is a system expressly designed for killing people, and I dont think I am either.
 
I think Genentech is part of a system that moves independent of the morality of the people within it. I think I left that night with a much greater awareness of a fairly simple thing. I came to look at that system, and like the campus itself, suddenly found myself in the middle of it.
 
posted by The Journalist
 on August 23, 2007 #
 
What the hell were you two on that night?  Sounds like a wicked trip
 
And beware the foosball playersthey are the spawn of the devil!
 
posted by Testy and Tired
 on August 24, 2007 #
 
Just a couple of things to say here (most of its already been said)First off, wild, random Thompsonesque behavior is great fun (albeit at someone elses expense) and as a fan of Hunter S. Thompson, and even Kerouac Ive pushed the limits of decency and reason.  Where Ive drawn the line is the at someone elses expensepart.  One of the security guards lost their job that night.  Thats right, because of your behavior.  Maybe he deserved it.  Maybe he was evil.  So, while you debate with the others on this blog (very wittily, I might add) about the dichotomy of life and its relationship with good and evil, YOU COST A MAN HIS JOB.
 
By the way Journalist, this duality of man subject has been argued to death by every intellectual or psuedo-intellectual since man has existed.  Plato, Aristotle, Nietzche, and yes Thompson, just to name a few.  Its getting old my friend.  Take a lesson from the oldest civilization on earth, the Chinese.  Its called Yin and Yang.  It is what it is, and harmony is only found when you embrace it.  If you really want to helpquit your job, move to the Arizona desert, build an earthship, and live the dream.  Otherwise, grow up and understand the consequences of your actions:  Yin = you storming the Genentech campus. Yang = Hard working provider to his family loses his job.  Theres good and evil for ya.
 
posted by Nestle's White Choclate Rain
 on September  3, 2007 #
 
sheesh. some people have no sense of humor.
 
posted by My Mobile Technology
 on September 13, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: July  4, 2007
 
Title: Real Good Books
 
So I was sitting there, reading Natalie Angiers The Canon and complaining to my roommate. God, this book is so overwritten, I whined. This is the worst science book since Lauren Slater published Opening Skinners Box. I read her a random sentence: Am I sounding a self-pitying, sour-grapes-turned-defensive whine? Of course: a good offense begins with a nasal defensiveness. I was about to read more when she stopped me. If that book is so bad, she asked, why do you keep reading it?
 
And so, we decided on a plan: for the month of June, I would only read good books. Unfortunately, this plan didnt go as well as I had hoped  good books are harder to find that it might seem at first. I realized what I really wanted was books that were compulsively readable, the kind that once you slurped down like wet noodles, where once you started in on them you just couldnt stop.
 
Ive read a couple books like that, but not many. For example, David Boies autobiography isnt the kind of thing I would normally pick up. Self-aggrandizing autobiographies arent exactly my thing and Boies, while interesting, isnt exactly a topic of fascination for me. But when I found myself holding it with a couple minutes to kill, I started reading it and before I noticed it I was most of the way through the 500 page book.
 
Or take James Wolcotts Attack Poodles. Now I love a good media-bashing as much as the next guy, but this one I just couldnt put down. I had to sneak away from dinner to finish reading it. And when it was done, I found myself wanting more.
 
What both books have in common, aside from being fun reads, is a small red rectangle on in the upper left of their covers. The rectangle is part of the Miramax Books logo which stretches from the back cover around the spine to the front of every book they publish. As far as I know, Miramax is the only publisher audacious enough to put their logo on the cover of their books, and while I initially took it as a sign of Hollywood arrogance, I now see it as something else: a mark of quality. Perhaps, I figured, Miramax works so hard to make their books readable that they want to capitalize on that brand by making it really clear which ones were theirs. I even dreamed of having my books published by Miramax.
 
So when my plan for June fizzled out, I tried to think of how I could fix things for July. And I hit upon the idea of spending it only reading Miramax books. Unfortunately for me, when the Weinstein Brothers (who ran Miramax) left Disney, Miramax Books got the axe. The Weinstein Brothers have restarted their book division at their new company (cleverly named The Weinstein Company, apparently because Fellowship Adventure Group was too gay) but their first real book doesnt come out until September.
 
So heres a plea to you readers: where does one find compulsively readable books? Who do you trust?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
July  4, 2007
 
I dont read much (not for lack of curiosity) but these books sustained my interest.
 
posted by Leif
 on July  4, 2007 #
 
With matters of this importance the only people I can really trust are my mother and my friends. The former being the primary source of recommendations.
 
posted by Tommi
 on July  4, 2007 #
 
I have no idea where to find such books, but Ill tell you some I have found (although it is mostly fiction):
 
At the moment I am devouring David Brin and Salmon Rushdie.
 
Richard Dawkins is one of those people who is so eloquent that its all too easy not to think about what hes saying. I recommend /The Ancestors Tale/ for a tour of coolities in zoology.
 
Neal Stephensons /Baroque Cycle/ took me a couple of months to get through, and I didnt want it to end.
 
/A History of Mathematics/ by Victor Katz has been good so far. /e: the Story of a Number/ was delightful when I read it, though it might be boring if you already know calculus.
 
Richard Feynman, obviously.
 
/This Boys Life/ by Tobias Wolff, which is a memoir, which, from what I gather, means an autobiography that reads like a novel.
 
/What Mad Pursuit/ by Francis Crick was alright.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on July  4, 2007 #
 
Autobiographies, when good, are always compulsively readable.  Try John Stuart Mills, Bertrand Russells, and Paul Feyerabends.
 
posted by Pablo Stafforini
 on July  4, 2007 #
 
Anything by Rachel Carson.  Silent Spring is something everyone should read just because of its historical importance, although its somewhat dated as a piece of science writing.  But her other three major books, especially the Sea Around Us, are amazing and hold up very well.  Id say Carson was the best writer Ive read.
 
As for autobiographies, E. O. Wilsons Naturalist and Watsons The Double Helix are must-reads.
 
posted by Sage Ross
 on July  4, 2007 #
 
There are so many good books, so you have to choose efficiently. Here is a method: decide based on the first page. If you cant decide, thats a no. You can read a lot of first pages very quickly, right there in the library. You dont have to be too selective, because what ultimately grabs you may be a surprise.
 
posted by Carl Tashian
 on July  4, 2007 #
 
It may or may not be your style, but the last most entertaining book I read was 11 Minutes by Paulo Coelho.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on July  5, 2007 #
 
I think lots of other publishers put their logos on the covers of their books, at least in fiction.  Penguin and Vintage definitely do.  Do you read much fiction?
 
If so, T.C. Boyle writes books that I cant put down, as does Nadine Gordimer.  I also thought The Russian Debutantes Handbook was pretty funny.
 
Im not much of a nonfiction reader, sorry.
 
posted by PS
 on July  9, 2007 #
 
Hey Swartz,
 
P.
 
posted by P.
 on July 15, 2007 #
 
How could you find yourself in page 500 of David Boies Biography if the book only has 384 pages? (according to your link).
 
In a trial your testimony would be disqualified.
 
;-)
 
posted by Javier Garcia
 on August  2, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: June 28, 2007
 
Title: Books I Recommend Without Reservation: 2006
 
I read over a hundred and twenty books in 2006. Some of them were OK. Some were good. Some were very good. Here are the handful that I can recommend you read without any reservations. This isnt a top ten list; the books arent in any particularly meaningful order. These are just the books that I can honestly say that, as a human being, I think you will enjoy reading (and youll be a better person for having done so).
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
June 28, 2007
 
Im surprised you liked Against Love. I was thrilled when I found out about it, since Im very sympathetic to the cause, but I was terribly disappointed when I read it - I found it lacking in substance, and the Kipnis tone ranging from whiny to drunken. Someone should write a better book about this subject. Still, kudus to Kipnis for daring, I suppose.
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on June 28, 2007 #
 
Great list. Given how many books you read  each one carefully chosen, I presume  very persuasive.
 
posted by Seth Roberts
 on June 29, 2007 #
 
Might I recommend the fiction of RIchard Powers? The Goldbug Variation from 1991 is amazing, read it twice to make sure it stuck, goes deep into what a crazy molecule DNA really is, into the ramifications of how genetics forces upon us certain behavioural traits. The latest one, the Echo Maker, instead explores the brain and how much can go wrong with it. All within the context of very real characters and their personal histories. Amazing stuff.
 
posted by Pandakar
 on June 29, 2007 #
 
thanks for the reviews
 
Here is an article by Karen
 
This article appeared in The Atlantic Monthly (February, 1990). It was subsequently expanded into an award
winning book: Karen, R. (1994). Becoming attached: First relationships and how they shape our capacity to
love. New York: Oxford University Press.
 
http://www.psychology.sunysb.edu/attachment/online/karen.pdf
 
posted by Albert
 on July  1, 2007 #
 
These are just the books that I can honestly say that, as a human being, I think you will enjoy reading (and youll be a better person for having done so).
 
 I cant recommend this book enough.
 
~ ~ ~
 
This is called gush and shouldnt appear in reviews.
 
posted by Oska
 on July 10, 2007 #
 
Nice reviews, I like your taste.
 
Would you mind sharing the super-duper-complete list? :]
 
posted by Daniele
 on July 11, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 30, 2007
 
Title: That Vision Thing
 
Ironically enough, I remember the moment clearly. It was about five
years ago now, when I looked up from the car and realized I couldnt
see. I had been staring at my computer a lot, and reading books when I
wasnt doing that, so I didnt notice much, but that day, riding in the
car, I looked up and realized I couldnt read the street sign. I
definitely used to be able to read that sign, but there it was, big and
bright and green along the highway, and all I could make out was a blur.
I had gone blind.
 
Legally blind, as I learned yesterday. My vision is below the legal
threshold in the US for legal blindness. (Far below, as far as I can
tell, but the eye exam chart doesnt really make fine-grained
distinctions at that level.) And yet, for five years, this never really
bothered me. I never wore glasses for more than an hour, I squinted hard
enough to pass the vision test at the DMV, I sat close to blackboards
and listened carefully.
 
I tried a couple things to improve my eyesight, but nothing very
seriously. I tried, but it never seemed important enough to warrant the
effort. And so I walked thru life, legally blind. I didnt really
notice.
 
My roommate, Quinn, has been nagging me about this. She wants me to get
LASIK, I think largely because it involves lasers. But finally the other
day I took some action and went to the optometrist.
 
You know those eye charts you see sometimes? The ones that famously
start with E at the top and then the letters get smaller and smaller? I
couldnt read the E. When I looked up at it, all I saw was a vague blur.
So they gave me contacts.
 
Contacts are an odd thing. Theyre almost invisible, malleable little
things that you cant see once theyre stuck on your eye. One minute,
youre living a Monet-like existence of a world blurred, then tap your
eye and suddenly, invisibly, everything is clear.
 
I had no idea the world really looked like this, with such infinite
clarity. It looks like a modernist photo or a hyperreal film, everything
in focus everywhere. Everyone kept saying oh, do you see the leaves
now? but the first thing I saw was not the leaves but the people.
People, individuated, each with brilliant faces and expressions at
gaits, the sun streaming down upon them. I couldnt help but smile. Its
much harder being a misanthrope when you can see peoples faces.
 
Then came the signs, the signs with messages I could read from a
distance. No longer would I have to carefully count my stops on the
subway because I couldnt read the station signs. And then the
buildings, their edges no longer fuzzy like clouds but hard and harsh
and magnificent.
 
I no longer feared myself, formerly this vague visage in the mirror that
I had to look away from. Now in the mirror I could see my face, and even
thought it looked good.
 
The resolution on my cameraphone suddenly seems insufficient. The crumbs
and dirt in our apartment that previously drove my roommate crazy are
now visible enough to drive me crazy too. I can look people in the eye
and smile and see them smile back. I can see the contours of their
faces. When I look up at night I can see the things in my room, even
when the lights are off.
 
My eyes are open and I can now experience the beauty thats been more
than a few feet in front of my nose.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 30, 2007
 
Wow!
 
posted by pwb
 on May 30, 2007 #
 
Made me smile :)  If I didnt have a phobia about things touching my eyes I might get contacts too.  Its lasers for me I guess.
 
posted by Rowan
 on May 30, 2007 #
 
Didnt you once post here about how you had some condition that made you unable to recognize faces?
 
Hmmmmmm.
 
posted by Mark
 on May 30, 2007 #
 
Yeah, the whole being able to see things thing is pretty cool.
 
posted by Nicole
 on May 30, 2007 #
 
I hear you, Aaron. The clarity of the world immediately after I upgrade my glasses prescription always astounds me, and the first one was a huge shock.
 
I was in a similar position as you, and I didnt get glasses for years until after I needed them, but I really liked the impressionistic effect of being partially blind and seeing everything in blur. Ive worn glasses now for about 10 years, but I still like to walk around without them on sometimes and experience the world in blurs and soft edges, without the extraneous details and the hard, sharp boundaries of the objects of the world.
 
posted by joseph knecht
 on May 30, 2007 #
 
What do you mean, you dont take off your lenses when you are going to sleep ?
 
posted by Carmack
 on May 31, 2007 #
 
I cant wear contacts because I hate to have anything touching my eye. Im now wearing progressive lenses which I find really annoying. Plus I developed floaters in both eyes, which are even more annoying.
 
posted by Mike
 on May 31, 2007 #
 
This is awesome!  I can clearly remember getting my first pair of glasses when I was about 11 and the shock of being able to see anything in any detail.  It was also extremely interesting going through a phase of correlating the individual blurs that different people were - so thats what Jeremy looks like
Its wonderful to have clear vision (even if it has to be upgraded every few years).
 
posted by Andrew
 on May 31, 2007 #
 
Thats great. Reading this made my day better.
 
posted by Mike
 on May 31, 2007 #
 
Your vision isnt probably that bad. I cant see anything on my laptops screen without glasses
 
posted by Alex
 on May 31, 2007 #
 
You should consider LASIK, its one of the best things Ive done. I loved contacts, but its nice to have perfect eyesight all the time. You lose the morning / evening ritual, and if you live your life with very irregular hours like me, your contacts wont get uncomfortable after wearing them 16 hours.
 
Besides, its one of the more surreal experiences you can have - youre awake, with eyes wide open. High precision machinery swoops down on your eye, peels your cornea away, and attacks it with beepy lasers. You can see your field of vision getting clearer bit by bit. To some, that sounds like the worse thing ever, but I got a kick out of it.
 
posted by Robert
 on June  1, 2007 #
 
Great news, Aaron.  And really well written - thanks for sharing.
 
posted by Ethan H.
 on June  1, 2007 #
 
I dont understand this post. Why didnt you get corrective lenses a long time ago?
 
posted by craig
 on June  1, 2007 #
 
ha.. I went through sort of the same experience. I was having trouble reading fine print, so I got an eye exam. The optometrist said didnt anyone ever give you a vision screening before? I said sure, plenty of times, I had them annually when I was a kid. He said did anyone ever diagnose you as dyslexic? I said yes. He said well youve been farsighted ever since you were little. Its not surprising that nobody caught it, the usual tests are for screening farsightedness. Youre not dyslexic, your eyes just have a hard time focusing at the distance youd read a book. So I got eyeglasses, at the age of 40.
At the time, I had gone back to school to finish my art degree. I was taking painting classes. The teacher asked me what happened to me, he said I was suddenly painting with more vibrant colors, and my whole style changed. I just said, well I started wearing glasses and now I can see what Im doing.
 
posted by Charles
 on June  2, 2007 #
 
I think that the first conscious decision in my life was to wear glasses constantly (rather than in class hours only) when I was 10 or 11, to see the world in full beauty.
 
posted by Lukewarm
 on June  2, 2007 #
 
Interesting is the first word that comes to mind! Pretty much reminds me of my own path to contact lenses. It was much like you described, for years I had no idea that I even needed any glasses! I used to get headaches and a bit of watering in my eyes but could mostly get by without too much discomfort. And when I paid a visit to the ophthalmologist, whaam! -2.25! Now, of course, its -5.5 and stable, thanks to contact lenses.
I loved the way you expressed your first view through the contact lenses. Very similar to what I had felt. Good for you mate.
 
posted by Timmy Jose
 on June  4, 2007 #
 
Your roommate and a poster are all for you having Lasik, but if you do consider laser eye surgery remember the operative word: surgery. Its easy to forget that Lasik is serious business and not every Lasik surgeon graduated at the top the class.
 
I work with a nonprofit Lasik patient advocacy. We dont provide Lasik; we evaluate and certify Lasik doctors based upon patient outcomes. We also publish the 50 Tough Questions For Your Lasik Doctor to help evaluate any potential Lasik surgeon. Our website is full of objective information and we host a patient forum where you can converse with others.
 
Now that you know what you have with contacts you may want to have it with Lasik. Pick the best available doctor and do your own research. Dont go into Lasik blind (pun fully intended).
 
Glenn Hagele
USAEyes
 
I am not a doctor.
 
posted by Glenn Hagele
 on June 10, 2007 #
 
Please do not tout or get LASIK before you read
http://www.lasikeyesurgerywebsite.com/Ten%2520Reasons.pdf
 
Ive been in the vision research business for over 40 years and beg you not to let them shave your eyeballs.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on June 16, 2007 #
 
Its simply amazing youve gotten this far, being blind.  I remember the first time I got my vision checked.  At 18 I could finally see.  What did it for me that first night was looking at the street lamps half a mile away.  No more blurriness and shiny lines that made every spot of light look like a drawing of a star done by a 7 yr old.  Every light was just that, a simple and pure point of light.  Hoorah for clarity!
 
posted by John Nelson
 on July  5, 2007 #
 
Beautiful.
 
posted by Kragen Sitaker
 on August  2, 2007 #
 
As a moderate myope, Im more favorably impressed by the content of Adam Kleins I Can See essay than I am with glasses, contacts or the prospect of surgery.  His idea about the automatic improvement of natural vision by way of relaxing the muscles at the back of the neck is worth trying.
 
http://www.adamcjklein.us/icansee.html
 
posted by toph
 on August  9, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 23, 2007
 
Title: Discrimination and Causation
 
First, lets imagine that tomorrow scientists announced the discovery of rock-solid, unimpeachable, 100% convincing evidence of differences in mental function between men and women. Lets say, for example, they notice that theres a tiny hole where the math center of the brain should be. No wonder they do worse at math!
 
No doubt, The Times would respond with a handwringing article about the important scientific implications and David Brooks would throw a party and denounce closed-minded liberals. George Bush would cancel programs aimed at helping girls learn math and Harvard University would shut down their task force on getting women tenure.
 
But are these really appropriate responses? Showing genetic differences is only the first in a long line of things that need to be shown to prove that gender-based disparities in tenure are unavoidable. As Jeremy Freese has pointed out, its a long line from genes to social outcomes. To make the case, you need to go a lot further.
 
Second, you have to show the genetic differences are relevant. Its possible the hole in the math center could be completely insignificant, that women do just as well at math irrespective. So you need to show that the hole causes differences in functioning. One way to do this is to find different people with differing sizes of holes, control for as many other factors as possible, and see if the size of hole is correlated with some test of math functioning.
 
Third, you need to prove that the differences are unavoidable. The brain has amazing levels of neuroplasticity. Perhaps with the right environment, women can be taught to do math with another part of their brain. Perhaps, as a result, they might even do better than men at math. Again, Freese has pointed out that the same genetic differences (or genetic similarities) can go all sorts of different places in different environments. If theres an easy environmental change that makes even genetically different women equally good at math, we ought to make it.
 
Fourth, you need to show a causal link from the genetic difference to the tenure disparity. Why is it that doing worse at math causes you to do worse at tenure? Are speed-math-tests used as a relevant factor in tenure decisions? If so, maybe you guys should really cut that out, because thats a pretty stupid test.
 
Fifth, you need to show that its the only cause of discrimination. Even if genetic differences cause some of the disparity, its still morally required for us to remove the rest. Do guys with holes in their math center do just as bad as women at getting tenure? Do women with no holes do just as well as men?
 
Right now, theres only even arguable evidence for the very first of these. Those of us who want to shove discrimination under the rug need to do a lot more work on the other four.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 23, 2007
 
But are these really appropriate responses?
 
No. We all know plenty of women who are good at math.
 
Given a mental task X that a man is good at, youll likely find a woman who is good at it as well.  This we simply know from experience.
 
posted by itistoday
 on May 23, 2007 #
 
Yes. And given a tall person, you can almost certainly find a short person who could beat that tall person at basketball. A correlation doesnt have to be 100% to be valid  and as far as I know, there isnt even a correlation between mathematical talent and gender. There is a correlation between variance in talent and gender: men are (as demonstrated by standardized test scores and subsequent careers) more likely to be really good or really bad, and similarly less likely to be average. Could be cultural, could be genetic, could be random  but thats only really important if you want to fix it, rather than just wanting to know it. And if you want to fix it, Id like to know why.
 
The higher standard deviation means that for accomplishments that require the top fraction of a percentile, men will be overwhelmingly dominant even though the average man isnt better at math than the average woman.
 
posted by Byrne
 on May 23, 2007 #
 
Aaron, as you see from Byrnes response - not to mention The Bell Curve - you are dealing with rationalization, not rationality.
 
Not that I mean to discourage fighting the good fight, especially for higher-readership people such as you. But myself, I find the limited power of rational argument to be very frustrating.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on May 26, 2007 #
 
Before someone get huffy, I should note the refution of the above statistical argument, which granted is a bit subtle: The problem is that it relies on a simplistic statistical model in exactly the range where that model is least reliable - which, rationally, should at least give pause regarding how correct an explation it is.
 
The deep problem is that Ive never seen anyone who advanced that argument then say, Yknow, you have a really good point there. All models are provisional, and I never realized there was a subtle flaw in my statistics there. Its always something like No! The model says! Its just natural, men get to be in overwhelmingly in the top spots, science proves it!. This is why a certain type of liberal comes to hate science - I strongly disagree with them on their anti-science views, but I sure understand where they are coming from.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on May 26, 2007 #
 
There is a correlation between variance in talent and gender: men are (as demonstrated by standardized test scores and subsequent careers) more likely to be really good or really bad, and similarly less likely to be average. Could be cultural, could be genetic, could be random
 
It could be that standardized tests measure the ability to perform well on standardized tests, not apply abstraction and logic to real-world problem solving.
 
The career observation is completely bound in gender-role norms/expectations and, most likely, indicative of only that.
 
Such makes mathematical talent extremely difficult to measure.
 
posted by Carty
 on May 28, 2007 #
 
The main reason genetic differences matter is that we might be able to enhance humans by knowing them.
 
If there is a smarts gene ( i know, i know  a whole set of em with tradeoffs  ), we should find it.
 
The problem is that it is completely taboo to even suggest people study the issue earnestly.
 
Think about the opportunity cost of that decision. Specifically, think about the unenhanced researchers whose development is relatively impaired compared to where they could have been without the taboo.
 
Clearly there are huge genetic and sociological issues leading to the trends in disparity of outcome between groups.
 
Hoping to fight the unjust causes, such as blatant discrimination, should not come at the expense of hindering research.
 
posted by Ivan Kirigin
 on May 29, 2007 #
 
Id be delighted to respond to Seths counterarguments about the correlation between genotype and phenotype, but so far, Seth has only addressed the correlation between being me and being Bad and Wrong and Dumb.
 
Of course models are provisional! Of course they could be wrong! Id be delighted to have some sort of laboratory to test them  perhaps some kind of educational system in which people of given attributes take tests, and these scores are recorded and later compared to the average success rates in those groups. For example, if our tests revealed that men and women had roughly equal ability, but different variances in skill, and if their later success demonstrated approximately equal average ability, but substantial variance in skill, we might decide that the correlation between gender and variance in mathematical ability implied some sort of correlation between gender and variance in mathematical ability.
 
Until that happy day, Seth and I will just have to use ad hominem arguments to emphasize how awful it is to disagree with us. Which is too bad, yknow?
 
posted by Byrne
 on May 29, 2007 #
 
Men are notably bad at designing civilizations.  Case in point: human history.
 
posted by Connelly Barnes
 on June 10, 2007 #
 
Actually, the most likely response to this would be a simultaneous outcry from those who say, See, we always knew this, now we have proof and those who say, Studies like these could lead to discrimination and the scientists were irresponsible for even studying the question. Its largely the exact same response when studying race, IQ, poverty, religion, sexuality, etc.  Aggressive egalitarianism has many sacred-cows when it comes to refusing to acknowledge differences, for fear they can be used for further discrimination.
 
My own feeling is that the largest reason for the appearence of a gap in male/female math abilities, reflects preferences related to the types of employment math is used in, and how it is used.  Perhaps the job of university physics prefessor isnt, for completely different reasons, as attractive to women as other employment.
 
On the other hand, people who firmly deny sex-based differences in ability, have no problems embracing the idea that men are more aggressive and violent than women.
 
posted by William Crim
 on June 14, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May 14, 2007
 
Title: Follow Your Heart
 
For years, Ive wanted to be on public radio. As a kid, we used to hear the voices of Garrison Keillor and Ira Glass and even Carl Kasell, while our parents drove us around in the stationwagon. As I grew older, I came to respect radio as a particularly unique medium for explaining things to people; a skill, like writing, that I wished to develop.
 
Ive had a few desultory attempts, but I finally had a good excuse to get my act together. Public broadcasting people are sponsoring a Public Radio Talent Quest and Ive decided to submit an entry. My idea was to make a radio show about science that matters.
 
Heres my first attempt. (You can listen and vote for me on the contests website.)
 
For those who dont love the magic of radio, a transcript follows:
 
Its 1958 and youre sitting on a table with your shirt off. You signed up for an experiment on vitamins improving vision and now someones plunging a needle into your arm. Ow! Since when do vitamins require needles anyway?
 
[music: Waltz (Better Than Fine) - Fiona Apple]
 
Now the man is gone and youre waiting for the experiment to start. Theres another kid here too. You both look pretty bored. Then the other kid starts goofing off. Doodling, making paper airplanes, that sort of thing. And then you feel it.
 
[TAP tap tap]
 
Your hands begin to shake. Your heart starts to pound. Your face begins to feel flushed.
 
[tap tap TAP.]
 
Boy, goofing off sure looks like fun. So you join in.
 
So that shot in your arm? The thing is, its actually adrenaline. Hand-shaking, heart-pounding, face-flushing adrenaline.
 
Half the kids in the experiment were told the shot might make their hearts race. And those kids? They sat quietly, even while the other kid in the room with them goofed off. But the rest? The ones, like you, who werent told? They joined right in.
 
One kid started throwing wads of paper at passersby. Another grabbed a piece of equipment off the wall and used it as a hula-hoop. They just felt so good, they later explained.
 
We think of our feelings as unerring: follow your heart, do what makes you happy  that sort of thing. But what the adrenaline experiment showed is that its not so simple. Feelings dont come with nice, clean explanations. Our brain makes a guess. And sometimes it guesses wrong.
 
Were not the slaves of our emotions. For the kids in the experiment, just knowing why they were feeling a certain way was enough to change their response.
 
Following your heart can be fun. But its also nice to know that you dont have to.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May 14, 2007
 
Talking way too fast. Hula Hoop becomes huloop and the phrasing is: long pause followed by whirlwind delivery.
 
They probably only get to hear it once and you must hear it several times and you know what youre saying while it should come as a series of surprises to the listener - who shouldnt be forced to ever do a whatd he say?.
 
Relax.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on May 14, 2007 #
 
Reads well and would sound great too  just slow down man ;-)
 
Have a shot of rum  or whatever your poison of choice is  and then speak really slowly too see the difference. Other than that, nice work.
 
posted by Rob Sawkins
 on May 14, 2007 #
 
I did a couple slower versions, but this sounded better. A lot of that is probably the hard two minute limit.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 14, 2007 #
 
I think its partly that you have very quick words, punctuated by long pauses.  It makes the whole thing sound less fluid than it could.  Like each short sentence is supposed to stand on its own.  I think you could stick to the time limit, and still slow down your speaking, and have it turn out alright.
 
Also, I wouldnt completely cut the bit of piano background in the beginning.  Just fade it and leave it going quietly behind you for a while.  Having it cut off adds to the abrupt feeling.
 
Generally pretty good though, certainly for a first try. :)
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on May 15, 2007 #
 
The short sentences work great in text, but less well when read aloud. Your writing style has probably been  been honed by years of checking your site stats daily, but a writing style that engages readers and maximizes hits is much different than a good speaking style.
 
Similarly, many of the constructions only work well visually. For example:
 
Then the other kid starts goofing off. Doodling, making paper airplanes, that sort of thing.
 
Here youre using a sentence ending with a verb, a period, and then a list of examples. Perfect for web copy, sounds really awkward when read aloud.
 
Also, your intonation tends to get worse at the end of sentences. Speaking in longer sentences would also help to ameliorate this, although granted youd have to fix this anyway.
 
Good overall design though. The informative bits do a good job at setting up the central insight at the end.
 
posted by Alex Krupp
 on May 15, 2007 #
 
I dont know if it was too fast or slow. I think you have to talk to a professional about that. Theres lots of different styles. I thought it worked really well.
 
The structure and delivery reminded me a lot of Ira Glasswas that conscious? He advocates  an anecdote with dramatic tension, plus a moment of reflection, and you delivered that almost exactly in 180 seconds. Not easy.
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on May 15, 2007 #
 
Yeah; that piece by Glass was a major inspiration. I saw that and said lets do that, but for science. I dont know if people caught it, but I even did a little homage to Glass.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 15, 2007 #
 
Nicely done.
 
At first listen the pace made me miss a few unarticulated words, but having read the transcript and then listened again, the piece came together.
 
Have to agree with the others; the endings of the sentences might need even more stretching and nuances. (But this is from someone who doesnt have an accent at all, heh.)
 
posted by Tommi
 on May 15, 2007 #
 
You do sound a lot like Ira Glass.  I read a very similar study on epinephrin.  The study was performed on grownups, and used a waiting room accomplice to induce the subject into a fight or a positive interaction.  Tough to squeeze a dramatic arc into 2 minutes.
 
posted by Jon
 on May 15, 2007 #
 
Was the experiment actually done? If so, does it have a title or reference?
 
posted by David Magda
 on May 15, 2007 #
 
Yes: Cognitive, Social, and Physiological Determinants of Emotional State (Schachter and Singer, 1962). Its a classic.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 16, 2007 #
 
What the first few commentors dont realize is that hes trying to sound like Ira Glass.
 
Then the other kid starts goofing off. Doodling, making paper airplanes, that sort of thing.
 
I wouldnt be surprised if these exact words were in a This American Life at some point.
 
A very good imitation, Aaron. Unfortunately, I didnt catch exactly what the experiment was the first time.
 
posted by David M.
 on May 19, 2007 #
 
I liked this piece (and its message) very much.
 
At one point Aaron says your heart starts to pant. As a literary figure of speech it could work but nonetheless it made me prick up my ears.
 
posted by FrF
 on May 20, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May  7, 2007
 
Title: Lengthy Interview
 
The other day I had a lengthy interview with Philipp Lenssen of Google Blogoscoped, which hes now posted with little editing. Its interesting to see how stilted my normal IM conversation sounds when reformated into paragraphs.
 
I say a bunch of things in the interview that are probably going to upset various people I know. In my defense, it was an interview  I didnt rehearse my remarks in advance  but Ill post corrections here if I said anything outrageously wrong.
 
Postscript: I did finish Intuition. It took me surprisingly long to realize it was just a novelization of the Baltimore affair!
 
Update: Help, Im trapped in a trend story!
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May  7, 2007
 
Intuition == Baltimore affair !
 
..nice :)-
 
posted by /pd
 on May  7, 2007 #
 
(I slept in a cupboard). Funny how you keep repeating that. Especially since Alex said it was only one night. Nice soundbite I guess
 
posted by et
 on May  7, 2007 #
 
It wasnt just one night; but if you sleep in a cupboard you justify it to yourself by saying youll get to tell stories about it later.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May  7, 2007 #
 
Juz read on your quite cool interview, really interesting. I especially liked the tshirt.
 
posted by Balakumar Muthu
 on May  8, 2007 #
 
Hi Aaron,
   Very interesting interview and very interesting follow-up on reddit discussions as well. I enjoyed the whole slugfest tremendously not for the arguments but for the insight they provided both for the arguments and the people involved in the arguments. As an aside, am planning to check out Web.py for use in a project ;-)  All the best for the future.
 
posted by Timmy Jose
 on May  8, 2007 #
 
Yay Aaron..But, hey I didnt know you looked so geeky as a kid :P
 
posted by Naser
 on May  8, 2007 #
 
Enjoyed it immensely.
 
Dont let all the critics bring you down. Many will try to cast stones at those in the public limelight, warranted or not.
 
Youre a bright kid, still. Keep on your desires, not theirs.
 
posted by naum
 on May  8, 2007 #
 
nice interview. yeah, it would be a big mistake if you take those critics (in reddit especially) personally. You have achieved so much in such a young age and should just be proud of that. keep the good work up.
 
posted by simul
 on May  8, 2007 #
 
In the interview, you said Blogs, TV, newspapers, and magazines barely do a good job helping us understand the news of the day, let alone the larger issues of the world.
 
I think Ive actually got a draft e-mail somewhere about this. Ive been looking for some site that addresses this. It seems a site could work, one that updates the state of countries based on several variables at several time scales. A table of countries and performance variables with a zoom button, but the zoom is temporal: 1 week, 1 month, 6 months, 1 year, 2 years, 5 years, 10 years, 20 years, 50 years, 100 years, 200 years. Maybe a temporal scroll function, so you can, in the time scale of your choice, step through the data: 1990s, 1980s, 1970s, 1960s, etc. Hans Rosling indicates this data is out there in his TED talk and names some of the data sources.
 
Each number in every table could presumably link through to a historical wiki article about that time period, providing non-numeric context.
 
How to measure peformance? Some baseline characteristics would have to be included: acreage, population, immigration rate, emigration rate, a cohort plot. World Mapper has an interesting array of other variables, but the data should be in tabular form for purpose of massively multivariate comparison, at least at the density of the stocks page or the sports page.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on May  9, 2007 #
 
Oh, and the NGOs could have links, so if someone sees a trend that bothers them, they can go to the site of the organization that works on such issues.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on May  9, 2007 #
 
That was a good interview. Always interesting to hear what smart people (who are also voracious readers  with the time to do all that reading!) think about things.
 
Aaron, what do you mean recovering programmer? Do you plan on doing any world-changing software projects? Or are you shifting your efforts to other pursuits?
 
posted by John
 on May  9, 2007 #
 
Whoops. Sorry. Nevermind that last question. You already said no comment to that in the interview.
 
posted by John
 on May 10, 2007 #
 
Aaron, I agree with your thinking about subtle sexism and racism in our industry, that the problem is widely misunderstood (as evidenced in the comments at blogoscoped).
 
There are at least four phases that organizations go through in addressing the problem, and there is lots of variability as to how quickly they progress.  1) the identification of overt sexist and racism, 2) attempts to enhance ?diversity? with awkward explicit or implicit quotas, 3) the recognition that organizations are more powerful, more effective, when they take advantage of individual differences, and 4) recognizing and driving  heterogeneity in thought, perspective, methods, as a competitive advantage.
 
I am a manager at Cisco.  The Cisco US engineering community is not particularly diverse by conventional measurement.  But the corporate culture is strongly driven by principles of inclusiveness and collaboration, harder to measure but better goals.  As more and more engineering happens outside the US the conventional metrics will take care of themselves.
 
One interesting stat: soon, worldwide, fewer that 30% of Cisco buy decisions will be made by white men.
 
Lastly, I?d like to better understand your mention of Cisco?s role in content filtering in China, will investigate further.
 
posted by Carty
 on May 19, 2007 #
 
I did a little reading, and I speak here as an individual, not a Cisco employee.
 
It looks like the Chinese government (or their agents) use standard Cisco router packet filtering technology to build ?the great firewall?.  There are no Cisco engineers ?building? the firewall, there are no features or functionality being developed for the Chinese government.
 
 ?Google?s hackers are a lot smarter than the Cisco people building the Great Firewall of China. therefore may be a tad unfair.
 
There are, broadly, two classes of packet filters.  Filters that act on information available in IP packet headers (source IP, destination IP, etc.).  These filters are gross but can be executed very fast.  Finer filters can filter based on packet payload contents (keywords, patterns, etc.).  These finer filters exist primarily for signature-based intrusion detection.  They run much slower.  It appears that the Chinese government uses both
 
I?m not a Google engineer or even a Cisco engineer but both mechanisms would be trivial to circumvent with multiple hops/spoofing and encryption.   I suspect this is not a technology issue at all but one of policy, and for Chinese citizens, non-trivial personal risk.
 
As for Cisco?s role, I?ll continue to learn more.  It appears that Cisco?s actual contribution to the Great Firewall is its unwillingness to refuse to sell standard routers, not clear to me that that?s evil.  I?d be interested in and open to alternative views.
 
posted by 
 on May 19, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: May  6, 2007
 
Title: The Incurable Romantic
 
romantica curious word meaning all things to all people. From my point of view, it means that in [ones] emotional relationships [one] should not be too brightsomething, perhaps, that I should not state so baldly. But again and again the action of the [romance] novels plot is carried forward by our heros failure to realize that in any mans life there are literally dozens, if not hundreds, of women who will do just as well; that he wont die if he doesnt win fair Susans dainty hand; and that very probably he will catch a most uninteresting variety of hell if he does win it. Which, come to think of it, is not unrealistic: emotional maturity is one of the rarest qualities in life.
 
(Frank Yerby, How and Why I Write the Costume Novel)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
May  6, 2007
 
Confuses romance with commitment and letting someone walk all over you. You can be romantic and have an intelligent relationship.
 
posted by Ajju
 on May  7, 2007 #
 
I blame it on evolutionary traits that we, brainy humans, idealize and rationalize. The animal has to have some sort of fixation for the mate that it has found, so fit and all, so attractive. Really, we wouldnt bode well for the species if the interested animal just walked away from its mate at the first sign of trouble.
And then we humans make it into some sort of epic, and throw wars and tantrums in the name of love. We are neither romantic nor tragic, just animals with a huge brain.
 
posted by Camilo
 on May  9, 2007 #
 
in any mans life there are literally dozens, if not hundreds, of women who will do just as well; that he wont die if he doesnt win fair Susans dainty hand; and that very probably he will catch a most uninteresting variety of hell if he does win it
 
What a dispassionate view of love. Sure, fundamentally, things like love, jealousy, and the soul are illusions  bursts of electricity or chemical reactions in our brains or whatever. Sure, we are nothing but animals, but Camilo: we are romantic and we are tragic, if those words have any meanings at all. The knowledge of the nature of our emotions does little to soothe the pain of jealousy or belittle the joy of holding a loved one. That is the joy of being human - the joy of being imperfect, irrational, and emotional.
 
Saying we are animals with a huge brain is like saying Googles servers are doing nothing but playing with 1s and 0s, ignoring the service they are bringing to civilization.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on May 18, 2007 #
 
Andrei, you are an artist or a computer scientist. Or both. And you are right - I was trying to be glib about one of the most fundamental drives in our lives, and a force so strong that it even defies clear and imminent dangers.
 
Yerby is correct: we do not need that particular person to be happy, and many other people will come later. But it is because the way we treat that one person that we define our life and the way we see the world. It is just that, sometimes, it is painful.
 
posted by Camilo
 on May 21, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: April 24, 2007
 
Title: A Call for Science that Matters
 
Ever see a study that makes you scratch your beard? Ever hear about a research result that makes you go I wish everybody knew about this!? Ever want to run into a congressmans office and hit them over the head with a journal article? In this era of technological complexity and postmodern fiction, sometimes brain scans can reveal more about the human condition than a new novel. And yet, while the novels get detailed reviews in the New York Times, the best a research study is likely to get is an inaccurate description and some ambiguous quotes from the studys authors.
 
Well, heres your chance to change that. In the comments, post your favorite study  the one that makes you sit up and say wow, this result ought to change everything. If you dont mind, well take the best to help fill up a new website were starting, collecting and sharing these new research results. (If you want to help us with the project, be sure to let us know!)
 
Ill go first:
 
In 1994, the RAND Corporation, a major US military think tank, conducted a massive study (with funding from the Office of National drug Control Policy, the US Army, and the Ford Foundation) to measure the effectiveness of various forms of preventing the use of illegal drugs, particularly cocaine.
 
They analyzed a variety of popular methods and calculated how much it would cost to use each method to reduce cocaine consumption in the US by 1%. Source-country control  military programs to destroy drug production in countries like Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia  are not just devastating to poor third-world citizens; theyre also the least effective, costing $783 million for a 1% reduction. Interdiction  seizing the drugs at the border  is a much better deal, costing only $366 million. Domestic law enforcement  arresting drug dealers and such  is even better, at $246 million. But all of those are blown completely out of the water by the final option: funding treatment programs for drug addicts would reduce drug use by 1% at a cost of only $34 million.
 
In other words, for every dollar spent on trying to stop drugs through source-country control, we could get the equivalent of twenty dollars benefit by spending the same money on treatment. This isnt a bunch of hippy liberals saying this. This is a government think tank, sponsored by the US Army.
 
OK, your turn.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 24, 2007
 
I think the study quoted in this article very interesting: The researcher began the game by exerting a fixed amount of pressure on the first volunteers finger. The first volunteer was then asked to exert precisely the same amount of pressure on the second volunteers finger. The second volunteer was then asked to exert the same amount of pressure on the first volunteers finger. And so on. The two volunteers took turns applying equal amounts of pressure to each others fingers while the researchers measured the actual amount of pressure they applied.
 
The results were striking. Although volunteers tried to respond to each others touches with equal force, they typically responded with about 40 percent more force than they had just experienced.
 
posted by David Hoeffer
 on April 24, 2007 #
 
This older NYTimes article on coincidence theory is very interesting if true, although hard to understand what is causing the variability in random number generation.
 
Robert G. Jahn, a science and engineering professor at Princeton. Since 1979, Jahn had amassed a mountain of data demonstrating peoples ability to alter the outcome of a random event generator  essentially a machine designed to replicate a perfect coin toss over and over  in a minute but statistically significant way.
 
posted by Mike
 on April 24, 2007 #
 
I should mention others think the . So maybe a counter-example of what you wanted in terms of good science making it into the NY Times ;-)
 
posted by Mike
 on April 24, 2007 #
 
Oops, looks like ate the link. Meant to write some people consider the PEAR research very bogus.
 
posted by Mike
 on April 24, 2007 #
 
No specific papers, but anything dealing with the power of placebos in medicine is very interesting.
 
posted by Greg
 on April 24, 2007 #
 
Extrapolating, 
 
Except you cant just extrapolate.  If youre going to do this you should not use the findings to make bogus claims.  Thats just as bad as the NYT giving an inaccurate description.
 
posted by Rowan
 on April 24, 2007 #
 
The Lancet excess mortality line of papers would indicate some important matter.
 
posted by talboito
 on April 24, 2007 #
 
Recent study in quantum mechanics showing reality is overrated, thereby screwing over a large number of hidden-variable theories.
 
http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v446/n7138/abs/nature05677.html
 
posted by itistoday
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Donald Shoups The High Price of Free Parking (http://www.amazon.com/High-Cost-Free-Parking/dp/1884829988) explains how free street parking hurts our cities and our environment by poorly allocating a public good.
 
See also Shoups NYT Op-Ed:
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/29/opinion/29shoup.html?ex=1332820800&en=cdab73e4e6c4a982&ei=5090&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss
 
posted by Aaron
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
http://ruccs.rutgers.edu/ArchiveFolder/Research%20Group/Publications/Rethink/rethink.html
 
Implication: humans are not rational in most of the things they do, they are merely moist robots (in Scott Adams words). Misunderstanding this is what causes just about all of the problems in politics, religion, and personal relationships.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Good luck, its a noble cause.
 
But given the amount of trouble I have conveying the general proposition Everyone cant be above average, and the implications thereof, I have grown very bitter and cynical.
 
Id vote for some sort of primer on probability theory and how it interacts badly with human cognition, though I dont have a short summary handy.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Cancer Researchers Report Ability To Detect Cancer At Curable Stage
 
http://www.curingdeath.com/Research/Cancer_Researchers_Report_Ability_To_Detect_Cancer_At_Curable_Stage.asp
 
posted by pH
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Id vote for this; fast, broad-range visual machine categorization at a level comparable to humans.
 
Overview:
http://www.economist.com/science/displaystory.cfm?story_id=8954632
 
Thomas Serres publications page (all downloadable). 
http://web.mit.edu/serre/www/Publications.htm
 
I havent read the papers to see how general they are and how much The Economist is hyping but, it sounds like an amazing start, at least.
 
posted by AI Reader
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
A very simple test to separate out those who are incapable of abstract reasoning:
 
http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives/000635.html
 
If half of the students in a programming class are incapable of abstract reasoning (and will fail that class because of it), what does that say about the general population?
 
Prescription: people incapable of abstract reasoning need to be made into second-class citizens, with absolutely no say in any important social, political or economic decisions. Nothing to say about pollution, energy, healthcare, tax policy, war, peace, not even the political system itself. Their judgement is provably no good.
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
M. King Hubberts original paper on Nuclear Energy and the Fossil Fuels.
 
http://www.energybulletin.net/13630.html
 
we need to switch to nuclear ASAP. That means electric powered high speed trains, not trains. And subways, not automobiles.
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
http://www.physorg.com/news96002930.html
 
this is really a statement of the obvious. But basically, cities are good and the larger they are the better. The more you share key infrastructure, the more efficiently you use your resources, the more surplus you leave for people to live the good life, the more leisure they have, the more time they have to innovate.
 
We need to figure out ways to build downtowns like Paris instead of growing lots of tiny towns or decreasing urban density by plopping down commercial skyscrapers. Death to urban planners!
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Trees reduce traffic accidents.
 
http://www.newurbannews.com/ResearchTreesSep06.html
 
The more trees (and other street furniture you have) on a street, the fewer accidents you have.
 
Other results you can find: traffic signs generally increase the rate of accidents.
 
http://carfree.com isnt science so much as engineering, but basically, we KNOW how to build liveable cities. Were just not doing it.
 
Everything you know about building liveable cities is wrong! Death to urban planners!
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
How to eliminate war and all other social ills, by eradicating child abuse:
 
http://www.nospank.net/mcfrlnd.htm
 
child abuse of any kind (including spanking) is condemned by pediatrics associations.
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Any research into breastfeeding vs infant formula. And theres lots of it available. Infant formula should be made illegal and its manufacturers thrown in jail.
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Research into the productivity of cooperatives versus corporations. IOW, social democracy versus white-collar totalitarianism.
 
http://www.eurotrib.com/story/2007/2/24/7369/59357#22
 
http://www.amazon.com/Seven-Day-Weekend-Changing-Work-Works/dp/1591840260
 
Social democracy produces superior results according to every single metric. This is empirically proved. Corporations should be made illegal.
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
What happened in Worgl, Austria at the height of the Great Depression. The imposition of demurrage to the currency lifted an entire region out of poverty. Until the bankers got scared and quashed it. Death to bankers!
 
http://www.reinventingmoney.com/worglCurrDemurr.php
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Rand Study - re Science that matters
 
the obvious tradeoff, unmentioned in your summary is the numbers of source-countrys vs the number of users.   and governments tend have more structured ways of dealing w/ peers (other governments) than with citizens.  couple this with a known tendency to have plausable deniability - its the governments job instead of each person being indivdually responsible, is in large measure a cost driver.  imho of course.
 
posted by bill 
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
http://www.fastcompany.com/magazine/96/open_boss.html
 
Hares new research (new? its old by now) into corporate psychopaths. Another reason why corporations should be made illegal.
 
Oh, speaking of psychopaths? Forget second-class citizens, they should be third-class citizens. Because theyre not human beings, theyre something else.
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Montessori method. Sudbury Valley / Summerhill. Democratic schools. Free schools. All different words for one thing: ANARCHIST schools. Schools made by anarchists at the end of the 19th century to propagate their values. Because raising children to become autonomous individuals instead of obedient little robots generates enormous dividends. Economic, sociological, and of course intellectual.
 
Ricardo Semler of the wildly successful Semco has started an anarchist school in Brazil to rescue children from the traditional school system.
 
The research on this subject? There are multiple books written just presenting the research. ALFIE KOHN!
 
http://www.alfiekohn.org/books.htm#null
 
THE HOMEWORK MYTH: Why Our Kids Get Too Much of a Bad Thing
 
THE CASE AGAINST STANDARDIZED TESTING: Raising the Scores, Ruining the Schools
 
THE SCHOOLS OUR CHILDREN DESERVE: Moving Beyond Traditional Classrooms and Tougher Standards
 
BEYOND DISCIPLINE: From Compliance to Community
 
PUNISHED BY REWARDS: The Trouble with Gold Stars, Incentive Plans, As, Praise, and Other Bribes
 
Thats 5 books just about different aspects of schooling. All of them presenting solid research.
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
NO CONTEST: The Case Against Competition
 
http://www.alfiekohn.org/books.htm#null
 
An old, old book of Alfie Kohns that is exquisitely researched. It changes everything!
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
UNCONDITIONAL PARENTING: Moving from Rewards and Punishments to Love and Reason
 
Another Alfie Kohn book. Draws on the literal mountain of research in empathic parenting. Also known as Taking Children Seriously. Also known as the Helping Mode of Parenting. There are many researchers working on this subject. McFarland (the pediatrist) above is only one of them, dealing with only a small part of it.
 
And empathic parenting is only the tip of a very big iceberg in research about the history of childhood. Childhood in the past was horrific. And childhood in primitive cultures is horrific. This has enormous implications for foreign policy. We shouldnt be respecting third-world cultures. We should be breaking them using armies of social workers.
 
posted by rk
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Uh, I think he was requesting interesting, completely unintuitive research.  Not books and papers that discuss your own personal pet causes.
 
posted by Jgraham
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
rk: Its not a test of abstract reasoning; its a test of understanding formal syntax. Its not really that surprising to me that most people, never having been exposed to syntax, dont immediately understand it without special training. I think the training should be pretty easy, but it hasnt really been tested to my knowledge.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Neat paper summarizing the field of human cognitive biases: http://www.singinst.org/Biases.pdf
 
posted by Jey Kottalam
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Unfortunately I still havent been able to read the actual paper, but the dichloroacetate results are pretty interesting, and I wish more people knew about them.  See http://del.icio.us/kragen/dichloroacetate for my collection of links on them; the primary article is A Mitochondria-K+ Channel Axis Is Suppressed in Cancer and Its Normalization Promotes Apoptosis and Inhibits Cancer Growth.
 
The most recent really interesting piece of research I ran across told me that the murder rate here in Buenos Aires was half the rate in California, which changed the way I looked at Buenos Aires.  (From http://wwwpolcrim.jus.gov.ar/ somewhere.)
 
Most of the research I think is interesting in the last few years is linked from http://del.icio.us/kragen/research - Im not sure everything really important is there, though.
 
posted by Kragen Sitaker
 on April 26, 2007 #
 
Research is interesting. Experimental results that are published due to a expected outcome are interesting. Experimental results that are not published due to an unexpected outcome can be even more interesting.
 
Its great to publish results when an experiment produces desired results. But what if out of 100 tests, only 5 succeed and 95 fail. However, its the 5 that succeed that are published? We are left believing the experiments are valid and reproducible when they are not 95 out of 100 times.
 
posted by Sean Abrahams
 on April 26, 2007 #
 
Brain scans tell us nothing. Reading them is akin to reading tea leaves. It is an advanced version of phrenology which attempts to localize certain activity in certain parts of the brain. But this consistency is an illusion.
 
Moreover, a policy paper on drug treatments is not science, clown. Try getting a real education before pretending to know what science is.
 
Anyone who thinks Chomsky knows anything is clearly incompetent to judge such matters.
 
Leave science to the professionals -and educated - and go code something interesting.
 
posted by Non Believer
 on April 27, 2007 #
 
Interesting idea. Heres a survey that changed how I think about diet. Summary: Half of all chemicals tested in standard high-dose animal cancer tests, whether occurring naturally or produced synthetically, are carcinogens.   The focus of regulatory policy is on synthetic chemicals, although 99.9% of the chemicals humans ingest are natural.  Plants in the human diet contain thousands of natural pesticides produced by plants to protect themselves from insects and other predators.  If reducing synthetic pesticides makes fruits and vegetables more expensive, thereby decreasing consumption, then the cancer rate will increase, especially for the poor.
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on April 27, 2007 #
 
rk: I find it really amusing that right after admitting that what carfree.com offers isnt really science, you make the astonishing claim that eradicating spanking and child abuse will eliminate war and all other social ills. You also offer me no good reason to believe that those who truly are incapable of abstract reasoning need to be made into second-class citizens.
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on April 27, 2007 #
 
This is an entertaining read makes you wonder if intelligence is a catch-22.
 
Unskilled and Unaware of It: How Difficulties in Recognizing Ones Own Incompetence Leads to Inflated Self-Assessments
http://www.apa.org/journals/features/psp7761121.pdf
 
posted by Michael
 on April 28, 2007 #
 
http://www.geog.ucsb.edu/~marstonj/DIS/CH3_1.html#317 is kind of interesting in part because the results are essentially unequivocal, which we all expected. The whole dissertation is important and only barely starting its implementation (in Seattle), but this mid-point communicates the flavor of the results.
 
Basically its that having access to more information about the environment enables better handling of the environment.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on April 28, 2007 #
 
These were some really great posts; I read all of the linked articles.  Some of the cognitive bias ones were annoying because the researchers seemed oblivious that when asking people to Rank by probability: (1) A, (2) A and B that English is just ambiguous enough that its legitimate (or not, depending on precise wording) to rank (2) as more probable than (1).  Some of the other cognitive bias questions also likewise seemed stacked.  I wonder about the cognitive bias of people when confronted with the possibility that modern physics experiments may cause catastrophic events; for example, Ive been wondering for some time about the Large Hadron Colliders safety report, which uses Hawkings (untested) theory to that argue that the world will not end when the LHC starts up.  Now six different academics authored this paper [1], but one wonders about cognitive bias when one realizes that they are effectively promising that 6 billion people on our planet will not die due to the logical consequences of an untested theory.  Perhaps I misread the paper or perhaps I should contact the authors and ask for an explanation.
 
The programmers fall into 2 categories writeup is really informal; I think one should look for better studies in that area.
 
I guess you guys have already seen the Magic Ink paper by Bret Victor.  Lets see, Id recommend the Lifelong Kindergarten research groups publications (MIT) [2]; for an informal document, I enjoyed Computer as Paint Brush:
Technology, Play, and the Creative Society by Mitchel Resnick [3].  The underlying values remind me in some ways of Bob Blacks Abolition of Work essay, but presented without the anarchy and pessimism.
 
posted by Connelly Barnes
 on April 29, 2007 #
 
Also, it looks like youre editorializing, so maybe delete the comment by the ad hominem guy?
 
posted by Connelly Barnes
 on April 29, 2007 #
 
Oh, and call me superstitious, but I avoid AI research because I was once in the shower and hadnt thought about AI-related topics for 7 months when I thought, Hey could I use introspection to program a copy of myself?  I wasnt paying much attention as I flipped open a plastic shampoo bottle and somehow took a 2 cm long gouge of skin out of my thumb; the cut was quite deep.  Maybe lots of people cut themselves on plastic shampoo bottles, but it seemed really spooky to me.  This coupled with the sudden deep thoughts about AI gave me the really unsettling feeling that my body was disintegrating.  Not a happy feeling!  So I avoid AI.
 
posted by Connelly Barnes
 on April 29, 2007 #
 
Prosperity in the 21st Century West: The Role of Protected Public Lands
 
posted by Nicole
 on April 30, 2007 #
 
In other words, for every dollar spent on trying to stop drugs through source-country control, we could get the equivalent of twenty dollars benefit by spending the same money on treatment.
 
That assumes the last 1% costs as much as the first 1%ridiculous bunk.  A real study would have determined price curves for all of those methods as the percentage gets higher and higher.
 
posted by Charles
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
Albert Bartletts talk on exponential growth and finite resources is also important, not because it is particularly unobvious or hasnt been repeated loudly by many people, but because 99% of both the public and our leaders appear to believe in growth which unfortunately has the effect of clearly contradicting physics, even within our lifetime.
http://globalpublicmedia.com/lectures/461
 
posted by Connelly Barnes
 on May  9, 2007 #
 
From the Overcoming Bias web site (http://www.overcomingbias.com/) a pointer to another RAND study that changes everything; this time w.r.t. health care spending.  They put it clearly and succinctly (http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/05/medicine_as_sca.html), but the gist is that there is no correlation between health care spending and outcomes.
 
posted by jmc
 on May 15, 2007 #
 
For what its worth
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on June 11, 2007 #
 
Impressive article. I reallly like and share your ideas. I think the contributors are much more important. Articles shouldt be deleted because of format, I wouldnt call it a good idea. IMHO it is unfair for contributors it seems to spoil esoteric character of Wikipedia as the palce that unites people under the flag of sharing information. Wikeipedia is one of those places that make information free an accessible. Format shouldnt be improtnat this what seems to be esenctial - is content. Best regards
 
Araba Resimleri
Bebek Resimleri
Liseli resimleri
Kedi resimleri
Kopek Resimleri
Manzara resimleri
Bayrak resimleri
Sex Resimleri
Seks Resimleri
manken resimleri
Besiktas Resimleri
Hayvan resimleri
Fenerbahce resimleri
Amator
LiseLi
Hikaye
resimleri
seks hikaye
liseli
ifade
bakire
ucretsiz
Turk oyun
Forex
Sex Hikayeleri
images upload
image upload
Resim
resimler
Bedava Resim
Kral oyun
Video izLe
 
posted by Hikaye
 on July 25, 2007 #
 
Actually, I now think Id change my post for science that matters to the attempts by Aubrey de Grey to introduce the public to the potential feasibility of life extension research.  If one is being strictly rational, it probably makes sense to throw billions of dollars at researching life extension on humans and species similar to us.  Most people are strictly irrational when dealing with the ethical issues of letting people live longer, thus the pressing need to popularize life extension research.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aubrey_de_Grey
 
posted by Connelly Barnes
 on August 28, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: April 22, 2007
 
Title: Secured Leisure
 
When I was disengaged myself, as above mentioned, from private business, I flattered myself that, by the sufficient though moderate fortune I had acquired, had secured leisure during the rest of my life for philosophical studies and amusements. I purchased all Dr. Spences apparatus, who had come from England to lecture in Philadelphia, and I proceeded in my electrical experiments with great alacrity; but the public, now considering me as a man of leisure, laid hold of me for their purposes; every part of our civil governmentand almost at the same timeimposing some duty upon me. The Governor put me into the commission of the peace; the corporation of the city chose me one of the common council, and soon after alderman; and the citizens at large elected me a burgess to represent them in the Assembly.
 
(Benjamin Franklin, Autobiography)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
April 22, 2007
 
Improved ecommerce for public benefit?
 
Someone with computer skills and leisure might take a look at a project that could make new business models feasible  especially for musicians, artists, and other small businesses selling digital content at low prices.
 
By lucky accident I explored possible uses for online financial accounts that could REPRODUCE through any number of generations, inherit many services, options, and methods through family trees, and evolve in community use. Its new and appears revolutionary, but hasnt received much attention.
 
My overview at www.smart-accounts.org may look too good to be true. But if it wont work, then somebody whos bright could figure that out quickly. Ive looked for a showstopper for two years and havent found one.
 
This idea needs both commercial and open-source development. It should be available for all, not locked away in some corporations patent collection. I published it quietly for just that purpose, and have no proprietary claims.
 
John S. James, Philadelphia
 
posted by John S. James
 on April 24, 2007 #
 
I get it!  You think youre comparing yourself to Ben Franklin!
 
posted by captainObvious
 on April 25, 2007 #
 
Aaron, you should get business cards printed up that say International man of leisure.  Itll get the point across.  Works with the ladies too, I hear.
 
posted by James Head
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
Thats cool.  Im sure you can do incredible things with such free time.
 
posted by Connelly Barnes
 on May  5, 2007 #
 
Stop deleting the posts, mate.
 
posted by Bot
 on June 11, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 29, 2007
 
Title: Everything Good is Bad For You
 
While we were developing Reddit, we always used to run into people whod recognize us and come up to say hi. Oh, wow, theyd say to us. I cant tell you how much your site has killed my productivity. I check it a hundred times every day. At first, we just laughed these comments off. But after a while, I begun to find them increasingly disturbing. Wed set out to make something people want  but what if they didnt want to want it?
 
For too long, simple popularity has been the only metric of a startups success. Another startup, known as Twitter, has recently broken into the mainstream. And I constantly hear people saying things like Yeah, well, I know it seems like a pointless waste of time. But its so popular! As if anything so popular had to be worthwhile.
 
Cory Doctorow recently made a similar argument. When he publishes his books online, he notes, people are always telling him they dont like reading off a screen. And yet, these very same people spend every free hour of the day reading email and weblogs and news articles off a screen. Its like watching someone shovel Mars Bars into his gob while telling you how much he hates chocolate, Doctorow complains. Doctorows conclusion? Blogs are just better.
 
But I think Mars Bars are just the right analogy. Everyone in America knows that its easy to accidentally find yourself stuffing your face with junk food when youre not paying attention. But no one would seriously maintain that junk food is better than fine cuisine. Its just easier.
 
Similarly, if you printed out all the blog posts and news articles and emails the average timewaster reads in a month and placed the resulting hulking volume down next to a copy of, say, War and Peace (which it would no doubt dwarf), its hard to imagine the average person saying theyd actually prefer to sit down and read the first. (If War and Peace doesnt strike your fancy, substitute a similarly large tome.) But reading bite-sized blog posts is by far easier.
 
The same goes for reading stories on Reddit or your friends pointless twits about their life. Looking at photos of sunsets or reading one-liners takes no cognitive effort. Its the mental equivalent of snack food. You start eating one and before you know it youve gone through two cans of Pringles and become a world expert on Evan Williams travel habits.
 
We need to stop pretending that this is automatically a good thing. Perhaps Procter & Gamble doesnt care of their making us into a nation of fat slobs, but theres no reason why programmers and the rest of the startup world need to be so amoral. And no doubt, as pictures of cats with poor spelling on them become all the rage, people are beginning to wonder about where all this idiocy is leaving us. Which is where apologists like Doctorow and Steven Johnson step in, assuring us that Everything Bad is Good For You.
 
It isnt. YouTube isnt going to save us from an Idiocracy-style future in which everyone sits at home and watches shows like Ow! My Balls! (in which a man is repeatedly hit in the balls)  YouTubes damn-near creating that future. As I write this, YouTubes #1 featured video is titled Farting in Public.
 
It doesnt have to be that way, of course. Nobody prefers farting to thought. Its just that, as David Foster Wallace noted about television, people tend to be extremely similar in their vulgar and prurient and dumb interests and wildly different in their refined and aesthetic and noble interests. Similarly, no one (Doctorow included, I suspect), actually prefers blog posts to novels, its just that people tend to have more short chunks of time to read blog posts than they do long chunks of time to read novels.
 
Technology was supposed to let us solve these problems. But technology never solves things by itself. At bottom, it requires people to sit down and build tools that solve them. Which, as long as programmers are all competing to create the worlds most popular timewaster, it doesnt seem like anyone is going to do.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 29, 2007
 
Agreed although Id like to point out that nowadays these things seem to be more about people and governance than about technology.
 
You could probably use the twitters and reddits of the world for all kinds of useful things, if you really wanted to.
 
posted by Tommi
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
EYM IN UR BLOG, PWNING YER COMANTS!
 
sorry, just had to do it. ;)  where does compilation and aggregation fit in to all of this? personally, im not a huge fan of twitter, on its own but i think that if twitter were mashed up with other bite sized services, integrated into larger social meshes, and delivered through more effective medium, it could be a very valuable building block.
 
posted by Chris Hollander
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
I agree with Tommi. I dont think were lacking people to sit down and build tools that solve our problems so much as people willing to identify what our problems actually are and make use of existing tools to solve them.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
Noone prefers blog posts to novels?? I consider novels to be one of the all-time biggest wastes of time.
 
Also, I think YouTube is a bad target since it facilitates a ton of very important discourse.
 
posted by pwb
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
I think internet content is a slight improvement on what came before.  Lets compare:
 
Watching Americas Funniest Home Videos
 
Reading political blogs
 
Watching CNN
 
Wasting time at work reading reddit
 
Wasting time at home watching Everybody Loves Raymond
 
Reading comics in the newspaper
 
(On the comics front, at least, internet publishing is a huge winner.  Probably because comics already fit the bite-size chunk model).
 
posted by Lloyd Dalton
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
Question: So, is there an olive oil for the mind?
 
Thought (as I burned the time involved in a page of War and Peace reading this and now writing): Who is driving the log-file level trends we see? Im sure you have demographics data on reddit users, right? Are they 19 or 34? Whats their average income? If video games might be good for smarts, is it also possible that the Internet might still something for the better?
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
let me follow that up by saying I have started taking my class notes on my blog. Its a very much not useful to anyone else use of a blog and yet makes my life easier because makes I can browse my notes on line and to Wikipedia. And my Movable Type welcome note reads, in part:
 
Reddit is a timesuck no motivated individual can afford.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
let me follow that up by saying I have started taking my class notes on my blog. Its a very much not useful to anyone else use of a blog and yet makes my life easier because I can browse my notes on line link to outside sources, like Wikipedia. And my Movable Type welcome note reads, in part:
 
Reddit is a timesuck no motivated individual can afford.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
Does reading War and Peace actually make you a better person?
 
posted by Danno
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
The problem is with schedules of reinforcement. Blogs, being candy bars serve up their nugget of reinforcement quickly. The novel has a very long amount of reading for a more complex, richer and more sophisticated (perhaps weaker) reinforcement - insight into oneself, the human condition, and so on. A blog makes a pithy insight and we are done and we throw the candy wrapper away.
 
Youtube is the perfect example of the quick payoff reinforcer. Video is often instantly reinforcing for looking at it, and the activities involved are often more so.
 
I have not seen your site reddit but I am sure it is good since it seems to generate behavior according to your plug.
 
-Thelonious
 
posted by Thelonious Monk
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
One side of these things are of course that people watch YouTube or read blogs and social bookmarking sites but the other side is that the same people also produce the content. Its easy to say that watching pictures of cute kittens or the latest high powered beer cannon might not be very intellectually stimulating but for people who in the past exclusively would have been information consumers to start producing their own content on a large scale can not be so easily disregarded. No matter what you think about the content in itself we are talking about people breaking down the top down communication model of older media and replacing it with something much more democratic and p2p. So if people are consuming information created by their peers and producing their own just for entertainment they will probably deal with politics the same way. What we want is for people not only to read a few more books a year, we want people to start talking to each other about society and to start acting together to change society.
 
posted by Thomas Persson
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
<
 
p>Brilliant post. You must have heard the old saw, there are only two industries that call their customers users  software, and illegal drugs.</p.
 
That used to just be a weak joke, but not any more. When web folk talk shop, the highest praise is to say that that someones site is habit-forming. Highly trained people spend their every waking moment trying to make a media product hit someones pleasure center in just the right way. Is there a real difference between that job, and say, genetically engineering tobacco for a higher nicotine level?
 
That used to just be a weak joke, but not any more. When web folk talk shop, the highest praise is to say that that someones site is habit-forming. Highly trained people spend their every waking moment trying to make a media product hit someones pleasure center in just the right way. Is there a real difference between that job, and say, genetically engineering tobacco for a higher nicotine level?
 
But, Ill still take Web 2.0 over the mass media. Yes, the dumbing-down is happening, but so is the smarting-up. The world is slowly learning how to filter information without commercial or governmental gatekeepers  Reddit is just one step along the way and I hope you have some pride in that. Long term, Im optimistic. 
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
Aaron, I think you might find it interesting that the topics of most of your recent blogs have paralleled the same thoughts that B.F. Skinner once had. In fact, you are arguing the same exact things.
 
We can point to remarkable achievements in all these fields, and it is not surprising that we should try to extend them. But things grow steadily worse, and it is disheartening to find that technology itself is increasingly at fault.  Beyond Freedom and Dignity
 
We want to do something - we want to find out whats the matter with people, why they cant live together without fighting all the time. We want to find what people really want, what they need in order to be happy, and how they can do it without stealing it from somebody else.  Walden Two
 
If youre looking for answers to your problems, societys problems, and man-kinds problems, Skinner has proposed them. The reason why they were politically rejected is an interesting story for another time.
 
Its all right to stir people up, get them interested. Thats better than nothing. But in the long run youre only passing the buck.  Walden Two
 
Its a job for research, but not the kind you can do in a university, or in a laboratory anywhere. I mean youve got to experiment, and experiment with your own life! Not just sit back not just sit back in an ivory tower somewhere as if your own life werent all mixed up in it.  Walden Two
 
Cheers and keep it coming.
 
posted by Sean Abrahams
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
I may waste a lot of time on www.reddit.com, but Im also getting a serious education from programming.reddit.com.
 
posted by joe
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
Scott: Leadership in choosing important problems to solve is lacking, as always. However, Im not sure how many people (read: hackers) would join a company that, say, computes ways for Americans to conserve electricity.
 
pwb: Novels can be a waste of time. Youtube can be too. I think the point of Aarons post is that programmers have by-and-large abdicated responsibility for how their creations are used (you cant be a hacker if you go around telling people what to do all the time, I suppose). Does Youtubes ability to spread video that authorities dont want seen make up for fart videos? I dont think I can answer that. Are there features that Youtube could add that would make important-but-not-hip videos more accessible? Yes.
 
Lloyd: Yes, the web has improved media in many cases. What if we get so good at entertaining ourselves that we never have to stop and think? That question may sound far-fetched, but more programmers should ask it as they sit down to grab users attention.
 
Im starting to sound like a preacher. You shouldnt waste time on the web! You shouldnt smoke or commit adultery! I dont want paternalistic sites that tell me how I should be entertained/informed. I do want hackers to start asking themselves, How do we build something that people want that is useful?
 
posted by Dan Stowell
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
You couldnt be more right Aaron. Though it does feel a bit hypocritical because you work on Reddit. Why bother if you dont think its for the greater good?
 
posted by Anonymous coward
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
Nice post. This is all about hyperbolic time discounting . Thomas Schelling has a fine essay about it - its not online, but Virginia Postrel summarizes it here and points to a speech he gave on the same subject.
 
posted by tom s.
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
Just to save people the need to click, the argument is that some forms of widely-observed discounting of the future lead to inconsistent outcomes (youd rather had read W&P, but you red blog comments like this one instead).
 
As Wikipedia says, the functional equation for hyperbolic discounting is as follows: v = V / (1 + kD)
 
where v is the discounted [future] value of the reward, V is the undiscounted value of the reward, D is the delay in the reward, and k is the degree of discounting.
 
posted by tom s.
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
Dan, I think programmers in general are more idealistic than the population at large, but that may just be those Im watching (e.g. Aaron). If that company is offering a job, Id be interested. But in my experience, such a company would be hiring part-time or a volunteer position, because they dont have the money to hire a full-time programmer, because they dont have enough support from the general public, because the general public doesnt recognize energy consumption as a more important problem than, say, knowing what their friends around the world are eating for lunch.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
Nobody prefers farting to thought.
 
This is problematic.  Lets look at the weeks top-ten sellers:
 
The Secret by Rhonda Byrne (Beyond Words)
 
You: On a Diet: The Owners Manual for Waist Management by Michael F. Roizen, Mehmet C. Oz (Free Press)
 
Women & Money: Owning the Power to Control Your Destiny by Suze Orman (Spiegel & Grau)
 
Grace (Eventually): Thoughts on Faith by Anne Lamott (Riverhead Books)
 
The Fiber35 Diet: Natures Weight Loss Secret by Brenda Watson, Leonard Smith, (Free Press)
 
How Doctors Think by Jerome Groopman (Houghton-Mifflin)
 
In an Instant: A Familys Journey of Love and Healing by Lee Woodruff, Bob Woodruff (Random House)
 
I Feel Bad About My Neck: And Other Thoughts on Being a Woman by Nora Ephron (Knopf)
 
A Long Way Gone: Memoirs of a Boy Soldier by Ishmael Beah (Farrar, Straus & Giroux)
 
Infidel by Ayaan Hirsi Ali (Free Press)
 
The Audacity of Hope by Barack Obama (Crown)
 
Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leapand Others Dont by Jim Collins (HarperBusiness)
 
Religious Literacy by Stephen Prothero (HarperSanFrancisco)
 
The No A Rule: Building a Civilized Workplace and Surviving One That Isnt by Robert I. Sutton (Warner Business)
 
Go Put Your Strengths to Work: 6 Powerful Steps to Achieve Outstanding Performance by Marcus Buckingham (Free Press)
 
Pretty brutal.  Yes, I picked the best week ever to prove my point, with the Secret being the force it currently is, but I generally fart that most people would rather think.  Oh, I mean I think that most people would rather fart.  Or rather, if you believe in the secret, youre using your ass to do both, so maybe theyre one in the same.
 
posted by Dan
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
So, why not make a) more subreddits or b) (the better option, I suppose) allowing people to create subgroups from reddit. I, for instance, am interested in reading all about neuroscience, and if such a subreddit with an selection procedure kind-of-thing would exist, I would be inclined to register as a user.
 
Moreover, why not give people the ability to indicate which language they speak in a users profile, so articles in all their languages could show up for those users, instead of having only English ones?
 
posted by Bram
 on March 30, 2007 #
 
I read your inane blog post and learned about hyperbolic discounting. I guess the internet isnt all bad.
 
posted by sigh
 on March 31, 2007 #
 
Aaron, sometimes I find your comments a bit perplexing because, in the case of this post, you fail to take into account that statistics on popularity do not correlate (necessarily) to the overall positive or negative effect something may have on culture as a whole.  For example, even if YouTubes most popular video has to do with farting in public, this does not correlate to the idea that most people enjoy watching videos of others farting in public, just that the people who frequent YouTube do.  My dad, for example has never visited YouTube and counts as one of the tens of millions who never have and probably never will.
Furthermore, if we were to actually look at many of the inventions which people initially criticized for having negative impacts on people and culture in general (Im sure people made this claim about the telephone, faxes, email and even things like flying - I read a post of someone recently who believes that flying has made the world less well off because cultures are melding into one another - a concept I find preposterous, for many reasons I wont get into here), we will find that while there is a contingent who uses it in a completely useless manner, superficially, it has brought great benefit to culture.  The telephone is a perfect example.  While on one hand we could say it keeps people from feeling the need to visit one another, it opens up a whole other avenue to communication with people you wouldnt normally or ever be able to communicate with.  (For example, my wife is from Germany and I can only imagine how seldom we would hear from them or vice versa due to the fact that we are extremely busy on both sides of the Atlantic.)
So, as far as questioning whether applications being developed are making people more productive or not, I dont think that is a question that you can even begin to guess the effects of (using induction or whatever form of science/quasi-science you wish).  Twitter is an example of an application my colleagues (in the tech business) and I have debated.  While I feel that 99% of the content of Twitter is useless, just like that of the net, the raw content as a whole is telling about the subculture that uses it - and you need to remember that users cant be judged solely on their tweets/twitter comments, but also need to be viewed in relation to the content they produce on the web as a whole - and misses the potential positive effect it has on a sub-subculture within Twitter.  (I, for example, have been practicing using it for taking notes on two philosophy essays Im writing and have found it to be a great tool I cant find elsewhere because of the sources of input - i.e. IM, api or SMS - I can use for sending updates to my feed.  If you combine that feed with other items I have written, I think it is definitely a productive use of web technologies.  You are free to disagree, of course)
In the end, your twist on application developers needing to funnel their creative talents towards creating applications that are good for us is appalling because it assumes you or someone else knows what is good for me and good for culture as a whole.  (And I use appalling to emphasize my belief that trying to manage or control the way people interact in a free society harkens us back to the days where the Church in western Europe wanted to control what people believed and were allowed to learn - as an example.)  People should be free to chose their sources of relaxation (i.e. outlets) and also where their education come from.  For me, that freedom is responsible for the rapid progress we have made in science, theology, philosophy, etc. in the past two centuries.  Now all of this assumes you agree with my premise that the past two centuries are full of progress - and you may not, but thats another discussion.
 
posted by steven n fettig
 on March 31, 2007 #
 
Its the boiling frog analogy and the path of least
resistance again.  People will tolerate just about
anything if it comes in small enough chunks.  With
sites like Youtube, remember the long tail.  I have
found many valuable videos there, mostly live music
performances, so it has enriched my life even if
I never watch the popular videos.  I find that,
despite all the talk of empowering individuals,
the best content is still produced by dedicated
people and even the best home video or blog post
has little to offer in comparison to research,
software, books, or art done by full-time
dedicated people.  As another commenter noted,
if you kill user-driven publishing sites like
Youtube, people driven to distraction will find
new distractions elsewhere.  Plus youll be killing
off the long tail, and a lot of people will lose
a lot of value.  I dont see any other legitimate
way than self-motivated self-improvement to make
people stop wasting their time, but I havent
thought about the issue at depth.
 
posted by Anonymous
 on April  1, 2007 #
 
I think this is a really good point, Aaron. There comes a time when you just have to say to yourself I dont want to waste that much time, and do something more productive. I dont play World of Warcraft because I want to spend time writing code and getting good grades in school. Is it fun and easy? Sure. But in the end I dont think its worth it.
 
I have friends who live a lifestyle similar to your short attentive requirement/mars bar analogy. They watch a lot of TV, and dont do much else with their lives. All of this seems to fit with the hyperbolic time discounting model.
 
Its also far easier to write short blog posts than it is to sit down and think about something important, but the latter is usually better. I like your blog posts specifically because they tend to contain bigger thoughts that actually get my brain working and take some effort.
 
But youre right. Its very easy to succumb to reddit and think oh, Ill just spend five minutes. Forty minutes later Im sad that Ive wasted so much time. But sometimes it does keep me informed on whats happening in the world, or give me a new avenue of thought about something interesting. Is it worth it? I suppose each person might have to find where to set their own limit.
 
So good thoughts. I will have to watch my habits and force myself to do more productive things than easy things. The ironic part is that I found this blog entry after spending an hour browsing through feeds in Sage.
 
posted by Dave Schaefer
 on April  1, 2007 #
 
Someone should write a Firefox extension that you could configure only once a day (or so). You would set how frequently you can visit a certain site (your gmail account, your reddit listings, your rss feeds if they are on bloglines), and then it would refuse to browse to those sites after you hit your self-imposed limit.
 
Our resolution at the beginning of the day would then take precedence over our weakness whenever we have a free moment.
 
Id do it myself, but theres this neat YouTube video I have to watch.
 
posted by tom s.
 on April  2, 2007 #
 
Id prefer to read the bits of blogs to War and Peace.  Blogs have information that helps you; War and Peace is presumably written in a classical style which I personally am discomforted by.  But if it came down to reading the bits of blogs vs a brilliant nonfiction book, Id again choose the bits of blogs as theyre more useful to me, and if it came down to reading the bits of blogs vs a good fictional novel Id probably choose both.
 
But Ive never been able to figure out why the public cares about what it cares about.  Therefore, making something that is popular alone seems pointless.  Any benefit will have to come from other factors, like being a technological stepping stone or smacking people in the face with a new paradigm, or little network effects that are hard to see unless you squint.
 
posted by Connelly Barnes
 on April  2, 2007 #
 
Ill proceed to restate my previous comment in a more comprehensible and positive tone.  Im usually grossed out by popularity.  But I think that people do want to create cool things, and there are so many barriers in the way that programmers can really help the situation by knocking down some of the barriers with technological and social fixes.  So yeah, I think that programmers do have a duty to do something beneficial for the public.  Adding fuel to the blaze of apathy and popularity I think is destructive.
 
posted by Connelly Barnes
 on April  2, 2007 #
 
In one of the recent issues of Wired the cover story was about the Snack Culture being created thanks to technology. Anyone interested might want to take a look.
 
posted by mitchell
 on April  2, 2007 #
 
What about if you created blog comment and post fields that made people write with correct english grammer and automatically eliminated/forced those who write like this EYM IN UR BLOG, PWNING YER COMANTS!  to actually write in correct english.  You guys have this for HTML code in posts - so why not the english language?  That would help a LOT rather than spread stupidity via popularity.
 
sorry just a thought from a Martian Girl.
 
posted by Aoleon The Martian Girl
 on April 14, 2007 #
 
I have reddit permablocked on my router behind a password that is purposefully unrememberable.
 
Idea: how about a website that breaks down novel and technical books into short, daily blog-sized posts with an RSS feed? Werent many novels published serially when they originally were written, anyways?
 
posted by Andrew Yates
 on April 15, 2007 #
 
Andrew: I also blocked reddit (by editing my hosts file) for a time. Now the content is so inane that I dont have to bother.
 
Breaking deep material into smaller bits makes sense to me. Im currently writing about my progress through SICP and have found working on one concept at a time is tractable.
 
Distraction is the obesity of the web. If diet fads have taught us anything, its that there is no substitute for burning more calories than you consume.
 
posted by Dan Stowell
 on April 17, 2007 #
 
Scott: I think I waved my hands too much in my original comment.
 
[T]he general public doesnt recognize energy consumption as a more important problem than, say, knowing what their friends around the world are eating for lunch.
 
I think the point of this post is that people do, on some level, recognize the importance of global problems. Its just that at any given point in time, its easy to do local, immediately rewarding things than to worry about global problems. Thats why well-meaning, curious people are sucked into reading the web for hours. Aarons pointing out that hackers have abdicated responsibility for not thinking globally. Make something people want is justification in and of itself.
 
Come to think of it, perhaps that directive should guide how you build something, not what you build. At least when youre tackling large problems. First, answer Richard Hammings questions: Whats the most important thing you could be working on? Why arent you? Then, as you work on that important thing, make something that people want.
 
posted by Dan Stowell
 on April 17, 2007 #
 
This is good discussion.
 
Dan, first: Distraction is the obesity of the web. Perfect.
 
Though I feel that the ability to tackle large problems is often a luxury that most people cant afford. Even the education and intellectual training necessary to recognize global problems is far from ubiquitous. When you are broke, youre much more likely to work on small, immediate-gratification projects like web dev contracting :P
 
BUT! Ive registered novelbite.com. Its a small thing, but lets build this. Creating alternative, high-quality web content is a step in the right direction, I think.
 
posted by Andrew Yates
 on April 20, 2007 #
 
Word.
 
posted by Jonathan El-Bizri
 on April 21, 2007 #
 
Youre right.
 
But many of you have independently found out how to deal with it: self-restriction.
 
A particularly annoying minister here wanted a special card for playing on slot machines. Datatilsynet, the special government group set up to handle privacy issues, shot down that idea pretty quickly. But Im not so sure its a totally bad idea.
 
If it could be done in a way that respected peoples privacy, would you be in favour of a system that allowed people to put restrictions on themselves? For instance a card (with appropriate crypto magic to remove the privacy issue) that you used when buying cigarettes, gambling, etc, that you could configure to stop yourself from giving in to your vices of choice for a week, a month, or a year? Forget the practical and privacy issues for a moment. Do you see any ethical problems with this? 
Why shouldnt we be allowed to create rocks that we couldnt lift?
 
posted by Harald Korneliussen
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
Want to talk about wasted time! Every time I sit down to read Infinite Jest, I end up ignoring all the things I ought to be doing (chores, work, interaction with other human beings). I think its amusing you quoted Wallace, given one of the main themes in his writing is obsessing over trivial things (like entertainment).
 
posted by professorninja
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
Ive been noticing this for a long time. The thing is, as you said, people inherently dont like to read things on their computers. There is no computer-based solution to this, only faster-paced and smarter versions of Reddit on the horizon, moving us closer and closer towards total destruction of our attention spans.
 
If you want to spend time well, start by turning off your computer.
 
posted by Shii
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
YouTube can be a fantastic source of culture. Just look up Casals, Prelude in G, Piaf, Brel, Manolete.
 
You can see the only film ever made of Leadbelly. Albert Ammon playing his Stomp Boogie Woogie. The mind-boggling musical dexterity of Adam Fulara. Dozens of talented sopranos doing O mio babbino caro in their own way.
 
Where else will you ever see the late Renata Tebaldi doing the heart-wrenching Un Bel Di?
 
Hours of fun. Better than TV.
 
posted by Pierre
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
I fully agree with you regarding say twitter, but I believe the its about return on investment. I spend the first hour of each day looking at reddit. By the end of that hour I feel in touch with american politics, have probably picked up a few interesing facts about breaking news in science, know about some obscure and bizarre creature of the depths and get quick comparisons of cultural differences across the world etc. 
Although I love reading, spending the same hour reading War and Peace will not give me as wide a kick-start to my global community life as reddit.
You could spend lots of short timespans reading a novel but spending those same moments on reddit exposes you to so much more
 
posted by Ivor
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
Good point. We need to make the web more than junk food. In real life I try not to eat junk food, so why expect this from the web? I try to make my web site, Love Across Borders, to be non-junk food. :)
 
posted by Shaun Apple
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
Plenty of good points here.
 
As to why we read reddit (even if we dont want to want to read reddit) I think its like reading the gossip of the web. And simply put, were hardwired to want to hear gossip. Just like were hardwired to like the sugar in Mars Bars.
 
For most of humanitys history, its benefited us to keep up on gossip and to eat sugary things. Evolution just hasnt been able to keep up.
 
posted by Mike Johnson
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
Good thoughts.
 
The Wallace quote reminds me of the old Christian adage that or sins are pretty much the same old boring thing (seeking a lesser good, of which there are few), while each mans way of expressing virtue are quite distinct.
 
posted by Chris Ryland
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
It seems that the solution to your concern would be to make the classics as easy as the blog post, and thats being done at dailylit.com.
 
However, I have a feeling that there is more at work here than convenience/accessibility.
 
-kd
 
posted by KarlD
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
I run a site that attempts to offer a wide range of mind stimulating content, many of which are challenging articles that would take some time to read.
 
From watching stats over the years , I would conclude the same general truth - people are more attracted to more links to information , or downloading audio lectures of information they can save for later , or watching quick videos , than they are to digging deeper into the articles.
 
But having been an information addict for years , I can attest that later never comes , and the library of digital info available to us keeps growing - but our ability to stay in one place long enough to integrate any of it seems to be shrinking.
 
posted by William James
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
Didnt the BBC once consider themselves responsible for the betterment of the public?
 
They tried to offer the public what they considered the best of the best, but were criticized for being elitist.  Who were they, after all, to decide what was best for each individual?  In the end, they cant compete with people who give people what they want which is usually some form of pabulum.
 
If the people at reddit feel that it is their obligation to provide material for the betterment of their audience, then perhaps they should start some sort of elite group that sifts through the waste for the gems (using some agreed upon, documented criteria available for public scrutiny) providing these to the public via some page?
 
Perhaps you could have a Reddit Editors Choice page for links that are judged to be of superior value?
 
Id go to that page, and if I agreed with your standards, Id frequent it.
 
posted by babayada
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
Aaron,
 
The point about Reddit and YouTube is not that a lot of the content is inane or crap. When you get a very large user base, the average quality of posts goes down. The important aspect is that such sites make the few nuggets of quality content much easier to find and to spread to a wider audience. When I read reddit, I filter through to open only what looks relevant to me. The few gems each week make me more informed than scanning the papers. As soon as I find the return on my time too low, Ill stop visiting Reddit.
 
Finally, if people find themselves wasting time on Reddit, it just means they have time to waist.
You must already know that most corporate jobs are more about scratching your balls than scratching your head ;)
 
\boaz
 
posted by Boaz
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
I think people saying that you to re: reddit is just their way of flattering you.
 
Ive recently wasted about 30+ hous of my life watching the first 3 seasons of 24.  Ive also gotten 30+ hours of Jack Bauer entertainment awesomeness time out of it.
 
The same can be said re: reddit.  For every hour wasted, theres a great link or vide that I never wouldve stumbled upon otherwise, like the recent Mike Gravel video.
 
And if you, Evan Williams, Zuckerberg, etc didnt create those apps?  Someone else wouldve, and wed be wasting time on their sites instead of yours!
 
posted by Shanti Braford
 on May  3, 2007 #
 
Hi
I find your article interesting and would like to feature you as a guest author in 
http://Trendinews.com
I am the founder of Trendirama
If you would like to grant me permission to reprint, please send me an email.
Thank you
 
posted by Javier Marti
 on May  4, 2007 #
 
Great thought. So great that I think the first to comment missed the point I couldnt read past the second as it was just a waste of time.
 
posted by Jason
 on May  4, 2007 #
 
I was going to write a blog post about this topic, but it was easier to just link to yours!
 
posted by Vaughn
 on May  8, 2007 #
 
Regarding bits of blog posts and emails as junk food for the mind:
 
DailyLit: read books by email and RSS
 
I myself am currently trying to wade my way through Descartes Discourse, one small passage a day.
 
h/t Lessig; in a post announcing that Free Culture was just made available at the site (or was it at a CC letter? Yeah well whatever)
 
[random thought: if only Yochai Benkler was available through DailyLit; not thats a tough read]
 
posted by Ferdi Zebua
 on May 12, 2007 #
 
Is this a design issue? How a designers vision can change with users?
 
Paul Graham argues design is best when done by one person but also argues that you should hack out a version 1 quickly and let users mold the product.
 
Is this a contradiction or am I mischaracterizing what hes said?
 
posted by Jack Christopher
 on January 21, 2008 #
 
A software designer tries to build something that best fits the needs of its users. Theres no contradiction with having one designer who works based on constant input from users about what their needs are.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on May 17, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 28, 2007
 
Title: John Hockenberry on Reporting the War at NBC
 
John Hockenberry is a long-time, well-known American journalist. Hes won four Emmy awards and three Peabody awards. Now that, as he puts it, mainstream media doesnt want John Hockenberry anymore, hes become a Distinguished Fellow at the MIT Media Lab, where he recently gave a talk which commented on some of his experiences covering the Iraq war while at NBC.
 
Here are some excerpts:
 
I was very happily employed at NBC. I wasnt like, running around, trying to stuff toilet paper into the plumbing and sabotage the place. [] But I was interested, because we had a lot of meetings at NBC about, you know, if youre doing a story and the person youre doing the story about offers to buy you a drink, youve gotta say no. If youre doing a story and they send you, after they see the story, some napkin rings  silver napkin rings that are monogrammed Thank you, Jon, for the story, youve got not only to return those, youve got to report those to the standards people at NBC because theres a whole ethics and conflict-of-interest thing.
 
So at one of these ethics meetings  I called them the return-the-napkin-ring kinds of meetings  I raised my hand and said You know, isnt it a problem that the contract that GE has with the Coalition Provisional Authority [] to rebuild the power generation system in Iraq [is] about the size of the entire budget of NBC? Is that kind of like the napkin rings thing? And the standards people said Huh. Thats interesting. No ones brought that up before. Now Im not saying that Im smart or that Im advanced or that Im ahead of my colleagues or maybe I had a lot of free time to think about this or maybe Im some pinko-proto-lefty like Richard Nixon. I dont know! But the fact that it drew a complete blank among the NBC standards people was interesting to me.
 
[Now] in fact what happens in the networks  and you can find this at ABC and other networks at well  is that this [conflict with the profit motive] manifests itself [as journalists saying] Well, we are better reporters because we deal with these kinds of conflicts all the time. And because we deal with those and we always decide in favor of the audience, it sort of exercises our journalistic muscle. And this is the line you get from all of the entities.
 
You may or may not be aware that there was a real strong full-court press to sell the media  and Im not pro- or against it at this particular point, but there was a process in place where individuals in the media got access to the individuals involved in the planning of the war. There were generals who came in, there were former secretaries of defense, Schwarzkopf spent a whole lot of time giving sort of off-the-record, quiet briefings. And the generals would sort of bring in a certain group of editors and reporters and I went to all of these briefings.
 
At one of them, Hockenberry explains, a well-known pollster told about a briefing he gave to all the senior officials at the White House about how the polling data from the Arab world showed that Americas negatives were simply off-the-charts. Everyone was quiet. Condi asked a few technical questions and then finally Karl Rove spoke up. Well, thats just until we start throwing our weight around over there, he said.
 
Hockenberry was stunned and thought they should do a piece on what this revealed into the mentality of the wars planners. But NBC News didnt think this was a very good idea. America wanted the war to happen; their job was just to wait and see how it turned out. Were not particularly interested in the story, Hockenberry explains. Were a process thats trying to maintain people in front of the set, so in a certain sense media at that point was doing its own kind of shock-and-awe that went right along with the wars shock-and-awe [because] the business is just to grab eyeballs.
 
Later, his team edited together a montage of clips about what it was like for reporters who were still in Iraq to experience the shock-and-awe campaign. Vibrant images, narrated by a tense reporter who was on the ground at the time.
 
We played this piece for the editors. And it was very moving, very powerful, and it was a very different perspective from what we were getting. And at the end [] there was quiet around the table, because it was kind of an emotional piece and certainly the emotion in this reporters voice was detectable over a satellite phone line.
 
And the standards person goes  and again, this is his job, I dont begrudge him that  he goes, Seems like, seems like she has a point of view here.
 
The table was silent. Just dead silent. And I was infuriated. But whenever I get this sort of infuriated feeling I think You know, this is a career-ending moment here. There is something I could say that would be right. There is something I could say that would be wrong. And there is something that I could say that would be right  and also would be wrong.
 
And it was the beginning of the coverage of an event that would be extraordinary and I definitely wanted to be around to be a part of the next days coverage, but I had to say something. And it seemed as though, if nobody said anything, people would go well, I guess well have to tone her down.
 
So I said, You mean, the war-is-bad point of view?
 
The piece aired.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 28, 2007
 
Because John Hockenberry is part of the DRM (Disability Rights Movement) his outsiderness credentials go unremarked, but its worth noting that like most PWD (Persons With Disabilities) he brings something to all this stuff thats unique.
 
At least our last great hope is in reasonably intelligent company.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
I wrote a post about how I see the whole Support the troops argument panning out.
 
www.oldhacks.blogspot.com
 
I welcome all commentary.
 
Willy
 
posted by old hack
 on April  1, 2007 #
 
Thanks for publishing this (and for Hockenberrys original presentation).  I guess a lot of us already knew this is how the process works within the corporate beast - the phrase banality of evil comes to mind - but its still jarring to see such an account.
[found this from Eschaton via ThisModernWorld]
 
posted by Steve-MD/DC
 on April  1, 2007 #
 
Aaron:
 
Im confused.  How did you get a transcript of this event?  Were you just there scribbling notes, or is there a transcript/video somewhere online?
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on April  1, 2007 #
 
Wouldnt shedding light onto the mentality of the wars planners grab a huge amount of eyeballs? Thats what always gets me. Its just an excuse to toe the party line and spread party propaganda. The news would sell just as much, or more, if they would expose scandalous stories of the war planners and their idiocy. They choose not to do that as it goes against the other (grander) financial interests of the parent companies (e.g. General Electric).
 
posted by Alejandro
 on April  1, 2007 #
 
I was at the Hockenberry event scribbling notes and this reads like a transcript more accurate than my brief notes.  There was a crew there doing video recording of the event and I dont think it was from MIT.
 
My notes are at http://www.dailykos.com/story/2007/3/7/20143/71310 and include my impressions of Chris Isham, ABC News producer, at Harvard earlier that day.
 
posted by gmoke
 on April  2, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 27, 2007
 
Title: Aarons Patented Demotivational Seminar
 
Thousands of people out there are willing to give you a motivational seminar, but only Aarons Patented Demotivational Seminars are going to actually admit they demotivate you. Ive collected thousands of actual facts from real scientists and the verdict is in: people dont matter, except for a couple of rare exceptions, and youre not one of them. Sorry.
 
Lets start at the beginning, shall we? The universe is a bunch of random particles shooting through space following a handful of simple laws. Through completely random and unintentional properties, some of those particles bounced together to form you. But, I swear, it was a total accident. They didnt even realize they were doing it at the time and if they knew theyd probably feel kind of guilty about it.
 
For a long time, it was pretty clear that most people didnt matter. The average person didnt leave their town or village and so only interacted with a small handful of people who lived near them, most of whom found them annoying. The Internet has changed all that. Now the average person doesnt leave their computer and so only interacts with a small handful of spammers who read their LiveJournal, most of whom find them annoying. Luckily for posterity, their LiveJournal will probably disappear within their lifetime due to a hard drive crash or some other kind of poor server maintenance.
 
But lets say you want to make a difference in the world. You can learn a skill and go into a profession, where you get bossed around and told exactly what to do by people more powerful than you. (Obeying them is called professionalism.) Its completely futile; had you not gone into the professional (or if you decide to disobey orders) they would have found someone else to do the exact same thing.
 
The same is true even if youre the one giving orders. Imagine about the most powerful job you can think of. Lets say youre a US Supreme Court Justice, able to change the laws of the worlds only superpower with the stroke of your pen. Well, big deal. Had you not been appointed to the Supreme Court the President who appointed you would have found some other judge who would have made the same changes to the law. Yeah, you get to wear a robe and feel powerful, but when you look at the cold, hard, scientific facts, youre not making a lick of difference in the world.
 
Want to actually make a difference? Youll have to buck the system instead of joining it.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 27, 2007
 
Reminded me of Dylan - Everybodys got to serve somebody.
 
posted by Ryan Brown
 on March 27, 2007 #
 
I heartily disagree. And, to top it off, I found your post motivating.
 
Actually, people do matter when it comes to other people. (I dont know if they matter in the grand scheme of the universe.) And, though I get your point about being outside of the system, none of us are outside of a system. And it has been amazing me lately how much difference just one person in a powerful (or even not so powerful position) can make.
 
It is easy just to be a cog in the wheel, so I reccomend (to myself who wants to make a positive difference) to act with integrity and kindness - which alone can radiate out with such vast ripples of effect - and to be deliberate about which wheels I am a part of.
 
Even doing what I love and being willing to be happy is a blow to facism, frankly.
 
posted by B.
 on March 27, 2007 #
 
Aye.
 
posted by Tommi
 on March 27, 2007 #
 
Want to actually make a difference? Youll have to buck the system instead of joining it.
 
Your point is silly. The system has the power and makes the most difference. Youll just be joining the millions of arm-chair revolutionaries who do nothing but talk a lot about how wrong things are.
 
If you have some secret plan for making a difference outside of the system please publish it. Otherwise you are just bandying about a cliche.
 
-Devilz
 
posted by Devilz Advocado
 on March 28, 2007 #
 
What is it youre looking for? How would you like the system to be different?
 
posted by Sean Abrahams
 on March 28, 2007 #
 
Actually, knowing that you dont matter at all is incredibly liberating. If youre not a world shifter, you can instead relax and enjoy life, friends, and a good beer. AHhhhhhhh.
 
posted by Sean
 on March 28, 2007 #
 
Quote: The universe is a bunch of random particles shooting through space following a handful of simple laws. Through completely random and unintentional properties, some of those particles bounced together to form you. But, I swear, it was a total accident.
 
Alright, sorry to be a nerd. Im doing a PhD in Physics so please understand my agnst. FIRST, the laws of nature are NOT SIMPLE!! Dude!! What did you get for your Physics exams? Einsteins 4D description of space-time might seem like a simple idea to the layman (and I suspect a lot of lay people think they understand it because theyve seen a rubber sheet being deformed and a ball dropped into it), but have you actually tried solving Riemann Tensors for anything but the non-trivial cases? Its hard!! Very hard! And theres a lot more going on than the rubber sheet have you believe! And dont get me started with real Quantum Mechanics. Its full of postulates which cant be explained with convential logic and the number of postulates in QM is rather large (especially when you try to use the theory for solving real problems) - probably because its an ad hoc [read: crap] theory which hopefully will be replaced with something more elegant [read: more self consistent with fewer postulates]. Which brings me to the frontier of Physics - your Brane Theories, which incidently are also not simple to understand, even for the most gifted indidivals of this species. Yes you might have read Brian Greenes book, but its my personal experience (as a scientist) that other scientists deliberately leave out the crucial details when presenting a paper. And the devil Aaron, is in the detail!
 
Maybe when you meant handful of simple rules you meant simple to the atoms? Or simple to some God-like entity? Clearly they aint simple to us mere mortals!
 
Which brings me to my next point (abruptly): Entropy. Im not sure if you know much about the subject. I suspect if not, a googling is in order. Its a much loved subject close to my heart. Ill assume you know what the concept entails. So according to Entropy we didnt arrive by random chance. Human life was thermodynamically favourable for the given circumstances at the time, ergo we exist. I think you miss used the word random. Entropy is very much like Evolution, yes there is randomness - but its not truely random. In evolution some species are more preferential to others and hence survive and reproduce. I always thought of it as the same thing with Entropy - some energy configurations are more favourable than others, hence they exist. Again for anything but the most trivial example its very difficult to understand.
 
The great question (Im sure your smart enough to have spotted it) is Why? Why are humans entropically favourable? Is it because we increase the disorderness of the universe? Or are we a meta-state for something greater?
 
Life, is anything but simple and very few things happen in a vaccum.
 
N
 
PS: Sorry for shouting
 
posted by N
 on March 28, 2007 #
 
All the best physicists say, Dude!!
 
Newton: To every action there is always opposed an equal reaction, dude!
 
Einstein: Yo, Dude! The whole of science is nothing more than a refinement of everyday thinking!
 
Hawking: We are just an advanced breed of monkeys on a minor planet of a very average star. But, dude, we can understand the Universe. That makes us something very special.
 
posted by Ged
 on March 28, 2007 #
 
Get over yourself!
 
Oliver Wendall Holmes, just a supreme court justice, brillantly argued that one cannot make law from some set of first principles, we have to learn from cultural experience or the system to develop the law over time.
 
Aaron go back to school where your level of ignorance is considered free thinking as opposed to seeking sympathy from others about hard it is for a depressed millionaire to cope with professionalism.
 
posted by Jeremy Corbett
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
I made only be made of stardust and all those quarky thingees, but I do make a difference.
 
Nonetheless, your PDS essay made me howl. Still chuckling.
 
posted by Meteor Blades
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
Through completely random and unintentional properties, some of those particles bounced together to form you. But, I swear, it was a total accident.
 
Come now, surely youre joking.  That goes against every principle of evolutionary theory.
 
posted by itistoday
 on April  2, 2007 #
 
I think when people realize what youve pointed out above, they can finally start acting from a stance of humility. Much preferable to the egomaniac that wonders why the rest of the world isnt paying attention to them.
 
posted by Webomatica
 on April 10, 2007 #
 
This may be the most overtly revolutionary thing Ive seen in your blog!  Sure, its a bit of an over-simplification, but breaking things down to their simplest terms can also help to prevent meaningless justifications.  Thinking outside of the common paradigm is often the only way to matter.  Most other existences only allow you to BE matter.
 
posted by Michael Moriconi
 on April 17, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 26, 2007
 
Title: The Secret Behind The Secret
 
The #1 bestselling book in America is a 216-page volume called The Secret, based on a DVD of the same title. Truly life-changing information, exclaims the publisher on Amazon.com. A new era for humankind, exults the web site. This is The Secret to everything  the secret to unlimited joy, health, money, relationships, love, youth: everything you have ever wanted. [] [It] utterly transformed the lives of every person who ever knew it Plato, Newton, Carnegie, Beethoven, Shakespeare, Einstein.
 
What is this incredible secret? Namely, that the universe is governed by a heretofore unknown Law of Attraction, as yet undiscovered by conventional physicists, that the world rearranges itself to conform to your thoughts. Or, as one proponent put it, the universe is akin to a big mail-order department, in which you order what you get by sending energetic messages out to the universe.
 
This stuff is so blatantly absurd that its not really worth debunking. And its silly enough that Barbara Ehrenreich has already written the definitive mockery (Thoughts exert a gravitational-type force on the world, so that whenever you think something, the thought immediately attracts its physical equivalent. If you think money  in a totally urgent, focused and positive way, of course  it will come flying into your pockets.). Twice (I dont have to write this blog, I can simply visualize it already written  or could, if Id bothered to read the whole book and finish the DVD.)
 
But, drawing on some of Ehrenreichs other work, Id like to discuss they why of this book. The books success is easy enough to explain. As the Canadian publisher put it in an interview with the Toronto Star, Basically, human beings are lazy. If you tell them you can get rich just by thinking about it, obviously, theyre going to buy it.
 
But these books also have a more insidious effect. As Ehrenreich notes, by making your lack of wealth and a good job into personal problems, you discourage people from looking at the social systems that created and sustained those problems. By telling them their thoughts control the universe, you can persuade them to do things like  as one Secret-endorsing book encouraged  Place your hand on your heart and say  I admire rich people! I bless rich people! I love rich people! And Im going to be one of those rich people too!
 
And, in reverse, by telling people that bad things are caused by their negative thoughts, you get to persuade them to stop thinking about bad things. Im a really big believer in The Secret, a young black woman recently explained at a Secret-related book reading. But I also believe that discrimination and racism are real. How can you harmonize those things?
 
You just said you believe in discrimination, explained the guru. You be-live it. Im going to ask you to stop believing it, because if you focus on the negative, you project it yourself.
 
Thats right  if you stop believing in the existence of discrimination, itll stop happening to you. No need to fight to end it! Those black people banned from lunch counters in the South? They werent simply believing hard enough. Those studies showing that resumes with black-sounding names on them received far fewer callbacks as identical ones with white-sounding names? The researchers didnt take into account their thoughtwaves.
 
Following this idea goes to some pretty dark places and the authors take it all the way. I really love what youre doing, said a young man at the same event. But how, for example, was 9/11 attracted to the people in those buildings? Thats something I cant understand.
 
Sometimes, we experience the law of attraction collectively, explains the guru. The US maybe had a fear of being attacked. Those 3,000 people  they might have put out some kind of fear that attracted this to happen, fear of dying young, fear that something might happen that day. But sometimes, it is collective.
 
When you manage to convince people that even getting murdered is their own fault, youve truly found the secret of success. For the already powerful, that is.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 26, 2007
 
I find your term absurd very interesting  telling that you dont even attempt to disprove The Secret. Because you cant. Your desire to disprove The Secret causes an attraction of lack of evidence to you. Obviously you must believe in The Secret for evidence of the truth of The Secret to be attracted to you. You are so closed-minded, not to mention arrogant. You think you are based on reason and evidence yet you cannot see that you have not and can never disprove The Secret.
 
posted by David
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
The Secret is recycled dreck for the feeble-minded, but
 
I would assert that strongly held beliefs can open and close doors in our lives.  Actively changing beliefs can have very positive consequences.
 
I used to believe the world owed me a certain amount of success, happiness, and pleasure.  I actively rid myself of that belief, some doors leading to painful and futile behavior were closed, and some doors leading to fruitful and fulfilling thoughts and activity were opened.
 
I now believe (decided to believe, and labor to believe) that the only thing worth calling free-will is action that takes a person away from comfort, to the edge of a persons comfort zone and a measured bit beyond, in a direction informed by communication with the person I feel I should be, 5 to 10 years in the future (my future higher self).  Obviously, I also have to believe I have ability to communicate with a future self, one that shares my personal history, but has broken through some of my current limitations.
 
For example, I contemplate my limited access to the facts of my past, since it is mainly only available to me through imperfect human recollection.  Contemplating this limited access makes communicating with my future self through a temporal haze seem less fantastic.  And other mental exercises like this.  (Another example: imagining a dialog with myself as I was 5 years ago, as preparation for a third actor to join the dialog, myself 5 years in the future.)
 
Now I will quickly play devils advocate for the examples you gave.
 
I admire rich people! I bless rich people! I love rich people!
 
It is possible despising rich people might make a person feel conflicted while working to provide outstanding value to customers in a capitalist arena.  You would lose the edge to work hard to provide outstanding value, and you would then miss the opportunity to be financially rewarded (with outstanding renumeration).
 
But I also believe that discrimination and racism are real.
 
Believing that discrimination and racism were purely imagined might give a young black woman the courage to put her whole talents for display, because she will be unafraid that they will be rejected because she is black.  When she is rewarded (probably less than a white man would be rewarded, but still rewarded), her gains are very real, and they will also give her more courage to push further.  But those real gains came from believing a falsehood.
 
(I will skip the 9/11 example, because it is as thickly stupid as a migraine.  My ability to play devils advocate only stretches so far.)
 
My point is that individuals can sometimes gain individual success by denying social truths.
 
My point is that the strategies for individual success and strategies for success for a whole social/economic group (a traditionally disadvantaged group), those two types of strategies frequently class, if not absolutely clash.
 
What I see as a typical reason: individual success is often based on value creation; success for a whole social/economic group is often political and based on re-partitioning finite wealth and so is zero-sum.
 
I am leading to a question.  I dont remember ever reading an answer to this question.
 
Is there any way to reconcile individual gain and social/economic gain for a disadvantaged group?  Any way besides applying fractions of ones energies?  (I will spend 40% of my energy on political solutions, and 40% of my energy on value creation, and the remaining 20% enforcing partitions in my life to deal with the frequent clashes of identity.  With some task switching algorithm so that neither is short-changed, and I get maximal effectiveness from the fractional energy.)
 
Surely the golden middle will have some of ones energies toward the political, and some of ones energies toward value creation, and necessarily some of ones energies toward maintaining identity through contradictions of thought and activity (and some energy going towards task switching and effective time allocation).  But nobody seems to talk about working on applying this allotment of energies thoughtfully and systematically.  Nobody I ever remember reading.
 
Unless you are talking about the outrageously wealthy spending money, spending money only in their later years, spending money that has no risk of diminishing their standard of living, and spending money on a limited number of social goals (absolutely no social goals that put the current power distribution at risk).
 
(Sidenote: are value creation and political activism really in conflict?  Activities that satisfy both simultaneously seem to be few.  Surely, the world could not support hundreds of thousands of stimulating, provoking, readable political essayists.  I am also interested in learning more activities that simultaneously create value and promote a worth political cause.  Are they numerous enough to engage a whole citizenry?)
 
Why is an ordinary person with active value creation goals and active political goals so invisible?  My guess is that such a person working to such a mixture of goals would be a very strange bird.  And this person would be maximally politically useless and maximally politically inconvenient.  There would be absolutely no political gain (anywhere to anybody) from promoting such a way of living ones life.
 
posted by manuelg
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
Your desire to disprove The Secret causes an attraction of lack of evidence to you.
 
I keep re-reading Davids post trying to figure out if its exceptionally good and insightful irony or total idiocy. But I cant figure it out.
 
posted by david mathers
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
I see nothing wrong with any effort that convinces people to take responsibility for their own lives.
 
To blame everyone but oneself for ones problems, or to spend ones life trying to remove the mote from a neighbors eye while ignoring the beam in ones own, simply perpetuates the most vicious of vicious circles. Resentment begets resentment.
 
Yes, people do suffer innocently. There is racism. There is terrorism. There is crime. But the only sufferings that matter are the sufferings of the soul, and these can only be self-inflicted. Our own wickedness is what we should fear, not that of others. This is the message of most of the worlds spiritual traditions, both secular and sacred.
 
Books like The Secret may not be sophisticated, but they are saying nothing more than what the wise have always known. Sophistication usually does more to delay the coming of wisdom than to hasten it; the wise have always known that, too.
 
posted by Kermit Snelson
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
http://www.theonion.com/content/infograph/the_secret
 
posted by 
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
Hehe, when I was young, books were published before the DVDs. Seems like I am getting old - or society more superficial?!
 
posted by Bork
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
I keep re-reading Davids post trying to figure out if its exceptionally good and insightful irony or total idiocy. But I cant figure it out.
 
Thats because youre wrong: its cheap, off-the-cuff satire that I am almost ashamed to have spouted, so obvious it is.
 
posted by David
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
Kermit Snelson QFT:
 
Yes, people do suffer innocently. There is racism. There is terrorism. There is crime.  But the only sufferings that matter are the sufferings of the soul, and these can only be self-inflicted.
 
Uh, OK.  Note to self: stop inflicting suffering, it stings!
 
Your statement is so gloriously dismissive of anything a progressive might ever wish to do.  U win teh prize!
 
posted by manuelg
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
Note:  I agree with your general take that the premise of the Secret is absurd.  But, like many of these phenomena there is a small grain of truth which can be dredged from it all.  The essential ideas, which can be found more transparently and eloquently said elsewhere, are the following:
 
1) Goal focus is important - those with particular and explicit goals in mind tend to succeed at those goals more than those who dont, simply because they devote their energies toward steps activities get them toward their goal. This is somewhat obvious, but it bears repeating, since many dont think in this manner.
 
2) Persistence is important - those who persist in a particular goal are more likely to achieve than those who dont, or who give up in the face of initial failures/setbacks.  Again, somewhat self evident, but worth explicitly stating.
 
3) Internal and External Self-confidence is important  to the extent that the secret gives individuals self-confidence, however falsely so, they are more likely to reach their goals if they believe in it and, more importantly, are able to convince others to believe in it to.  Achieving a particular goal requires the help of many others, and, consequently, the ability to persuade others that your ideas and goals are realistic and attainable. This Law of Attraction is sort of pseudo-babble proxy for increasing ones chance of internal and external self-confidence.
 
Now, I am not one who advocates engaging in self-deception merely to get certain beneficial outcomes (assuming that the above identified traits will result from the self-deceptive act of believing in the law of attraction).  This smacks of the argument that believing in god is good, even if untrue, because it causes individuals to behave more charitably.  But, then again, we all engage in self-deception to some degree.
 
posted by HS
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
The classic is God works in mysterious ways (in reply to If God loves everyone, why there evil in the world?).
 
But the knee-jerk comments are revealing of the problem.
 
Its true that if you dont try, youll never win.
 
But its also true that there are situations where no matter how hard you try, youll never win either, despite thinking happy thoughts real hard.
 
Unfortunately, people are not strictly rational :-(.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on March 27, 2007 #
 
The cat people will try to pursued you that power through positive real estate is the way to go; but remember, you can always tell what is going on if you look at the car Mr. Busta really drives.
 
http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0102817/
 
P.S. Dont call my cat stinky!
 
posted by Michael Thomas
 on March 27, 2007 #
 
Aaron:
 
We all know youre part of the vast subversive conspiracy (along with Ehrenreich, the Communist party, and Emo bands) to keep people from the truth, negativizing their thought-waves so they will never find unlimited joy, health, money, relationships, love, youth.  Indeed, given your material success, its obvious youve been applying the Law of Attraction all along.
 
On a more serious note:
 
Seth: Unfortunately, people are not strictly rational :-(.
 
Why is this a bad thing, and what do you mean by strictly rational?
 
HS: Goal focus is important - those with particular and explicit goals in mind tend to succeed at those goals more than those who dont, simply because they devote their energies toward steps activities get them toward their goal.
 
The most goal-oriented people I know are hosers who want to be i-bankers and financial consultants.  I suppose if you consider success on their terms, then theyre most successful, but on mine, theyre wasting their lives.
 
Kermit Snelson: Books like The Secret may not be sophisticated, but they are saying nothing more than what the wise have always known. Sophistication usually does more to delay the coming of wisdom than to hasten it; the wise have always known that, too.
 
Ah yes, those wise wise holocaust deniers.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on March 27, 2007 #
 
You amateur skeptics crack me up.  Ive got two pieces of evidence that the book must be telling the truth:
1) The author wanted to have a bestseller. CHECK.
2) The author wanted to be rich. CHECK.
 
posted by Brent
 on March 27, 2007 #
 
The Self Help industry is the opiate of the masses.
 
Theres a new documentary series from Adam Curtis on how our concept of freedom has changed in the west from WW2 to the present. It goes some way to drawing out the context for the rise of the self help industry. Its called The Trap.
 
It seems to be available on GoogleVideo. Youre looking for 3 one hour segments. If it disappears, try archive.org. Several older Curtis docs are available there. (Power of Nightmares: the politics of fear is a personal favourite.)
 
posted by Brad
 on March 27, 2007 #
 
Jacob: People make certain kinds of thinking errors that are well-understood, but unfortunately understanding them doesnt help much (a little, but not a whole lot). Look up behavioral finance for one examination, which is applying congitive psychology to what people actually do in investing.
 
Some very bad things come from combining
 
1) The propensity to see pattern in randomness
2) Over-estimation of abilities (everyone thinks theyre above average).
 
So you get lottery-like outcomes, with a few big winners, lots of participants losing everything, and instead of saying Its a lottery. Maybe we should organize society more evenly, they say Think happy thoughts about winning the lottery. Think real real hard about it.
 
Some of this comes from the fact that the big winners then get to hire clever people to push the idea of Lottery winners deserve it, and how you can be one too. And so theres a feedback effect there. But the big problem is that even knowing the thinking problem doesnt give you much of handle on how to approach dealing with it on a societal level.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
Jacob
 
You wrote The most goal-oriented people I know are hosers who want to be i-bankers and financial consultants. I suppose if you consider success on their terms, then theyre most successful, but on mine, theyre wasting their lives.
 
I agree completely. The point isnt the worthiness of their goals.  Its a much simpler point  almost too self-evident to state  those who have goals, and focus their energies toward those goals tend to achieve those goals more than those who dont.
 
If somebodys goal is financial wealth, the person who single-mindedly devotes their energy toward becoming an investment banker as a means of achieving wealth is more likely to be wealthy than a person who haphazardly hopes for wealth.
 
This is ultimately a different question from whether the goals themselves are worthy.  I agree that many super goal-oriented individuals are doggedly pursuing goals that I dont consider very meaningful.  However, everyones preferences are individualized, so what is right for me is not necessarily right for others.
 
Thus, to the extent we can draw any wisdom out of the Secret, this is one  if you have a particular goal, youre more likely to achieve that goal by pursuing it actively, and letting people know that you are pursuing this goal.
 
Not a very compelling point, but it does seem to underlie the premise of the movie.
 
posted by HS
 on March 29, 2007 #
 
the trouble with the secret, and working individually, is that while ones own wishes can sometimes feel like magic, the benefits that accrue from helping other peoples wishes come true almost always feel like magic. this is why people band together and its caused by how dominated our conscious thoughts are by our anxieties, which blind us to the generally helpful and positive aspects of our communities.
 
(this is funny because just this morning i wrote a long thing about how wed wished ourselves out of nature, and poof, we got our wish. now what, geniuses?)
 
posted by hibiscus
 on March 31, 2007 #
 
To gauge the lameness of any self-help offer, just look to see if they equate happiness with the accumulation of money. The more money they imply youll get, and the faster youll get it, the lamer the offer.
 
Likewise any offer that tells you youll get something because you deserve it.
 
There are certainly some people who can really benefit from breaking out of personal or societal bonds that hamper them. But for most people, the real secret to being happy is to decide to be happy.
 
posted by mike
 on April 11, 2007 #
 
WOW!!!
Who cares about who believes in the secret or anything else for that matter! The good opinion of people just does not matter. Who are they anyway? Nobody and every body. If any person has to give a belief in anything to the public it is because of their own fears. Do not take anyones opinion except as worthless, just believe in yourself. Useless and meaningless opinions are a set up to put you down, useful and good opinions should lift you up, and these people who are negative by nature and should be avoided.
 
If I lived in the year 1850 and told a story about wavelengths of energy creating images in my minivan navigating me through the world on a system created called GPS. That would be so absurd to these people and even the language I would use or even a photograph of the automobile would look like an abstract painting. They could not understand what they see with their limited understanding of creation.
 
The people who have anything negative to say about the secret have a limited understanding in their minds of what is the future. The fears they hold and the ways they know are under attack and their fear of the possibilities of our future being so simple is threatening them and their limited minds and belief systems. They just do not know of what they speak and that is why the speak and live in criticism and fear.
 
I do not believe Christ was anymore than any of us but I do not say that Christ or Catholicism is not true. My opinion in that matter just does not matter to anyone and should not. So let it be said that what matters the most is what you believe in. Do not share with the negative world a positive way of life. Hard work is whose law? I see many people who work very little for lots of money. I see lots of people work very hard for little money. Money favors no person, nor can money give love. So believe in the secret and dont believe in the secret, just keep it to yourself and know that if someone has to give their opinion do not believe them because they are coming from a hollow and painful place that when they speak their main purpose is to put you down and seeing you fail is their goal.
 
posted by ROGER
 on April 12, 2007 #
 
Thus, to the extent we can draw any wisdom out of the Secret, this is one  if you have a particular goal, youre more likely to achieve that goal by pursuing it actively, and letting people know that you are pursuing this goal.
 
Kind of a truism, no?  I mean, I hope most people dont need to read a book to figure this out
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on April 20, 2007 #
 
I had cancer once, and a friend of mine looked me in the eyes and asked, What have you done to bring this into your life? and I paused a moment and said, Do you mean what have I done to bring into my life people who could ask such a question of a cancer patient?
 
Yeah, I dont see her so much anymore.
 
posted by raincoaster
 on May 10, 2007 #
 
The problem with The Secret is that it is true.  For thousands of years, we who have lived by it have been trying to teach it to the rest of you.  The only reason it appears to be a secret is the fact that so few people actually apply it.
 
posted by Clarence
 on June 20, 2007 #
 
Aaron - youre bang on with your criticism of the Secret. Im appalled by how many people have bought into it. Thats why I wrote The Happy Neurotic: How Fear and Angst Can Lead to Happiness and Success http://www.thehappyneurotic.com
 
The premise is that you can be productive, happy and well-adjusted while remaining as neurotic as ever. I think fear and angst are great motivators. The belief that negativity will bring down terrible karma on your sorry ass is totally misguided. If you use your fear to motivate you to take action you can do amazing things.
 
Many self-help books promise us wealth, perfect health, and even to reverse the aging process if only we love ourselves, say positive affirmations, and eliminate all negativity. But most of us arent getting any richer, healthier or younger, and were starting to feel like idiots as we go around chanting, I am a perfect being of love and light while cutting people off in traffic.
 
Keep up the great work.
 
posted by David Granirer
 on July  2, 2007 #
 
Quantum physics is real  A thought does birth action in your body.  Good thoughts bring good feelings and actions thus good health (less stress) and a higher success rate if you so desire.  The Universe does not listen but in a sense, it feels.  Although a grain of sand we are, so thus is a quark to an atom.  But, then I ask, what binds it all?  Energy, yes?  Ay, theres the rub.  The Universe feels I think.  Energy is its tentacles.
 
I cannot say that The Secret is true or not.  All I know is that when I was told passionately by my friend about it, I felt really good and I accomplished more goals and started new ones with fervor.  One can not judge this just by a movie (perhaps that is why you are disturbed, because they made money off of people buying it?), but must try for themselves.  But if you do not believe, then you will not know.
 
If we are to deny truths but have only beliefs then we will never advance as a society to any level but only digress.
 
We will know more and see more in the future when we are ready for it.  I have hope that you will as well.
 
posted by Dan Chevalier
 on July 28, 2007 #
 
Get 2 magnets. The LOA says that like attract like so that means north pole will attract to north pole?
 
posted by Reuben
 on July 18, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 25, 2007
 
Title: Newspeak
 
It started way back in the eighties, with the Stay Free maxi-pads. At least, thats what they said on this TV documentary I saw once. How could you tell people to protect their freedom when they thought you were talking about feminine hygiene products? I mean, you still had the words, of course, it wasnt Orwellian or anything, they didnt take away the words, they just added new meanings to them. Particular kinds of meanings. And who really wanted to use them after that? It made the whole idea of freedom seem kind of dirty.
 
We dont have freedom either, of course. Freedom lasted a little longer, before finally dying out in the late nineties when the name was taken by that pornography download software. I mean, try telling some guy in the street youre just trying to protect your freedom. Ive tried! He laughs and then he makes some sort of obscene sexual pantomime. Makes it kind of hard to be an activist.
 
Activist took a little longer. Companies bought out the core concepts before they moved to the little stuff like us activists. Activist was what they called it when they privatized the sewer system in the late 2000s. Activists are shit, you used to hear the right-wingers say. Now they dont even need to say it  its in the dictionary.
 
So when I recruit kids I cant tell them what theyd be. Saying theyd be activists is straight out, obviously. But I cant even tell them we do protests. Protest is what they call it when you call AAA when your car breaks down. Kids dont want to go around fixing broken cars. Theyre not big on protests.
 
Liberty quickly became the leading brand of thong underwear. Control is the #2 online role-playing game. Rights are the new name for gift certificates. Democracy is the kind of M&Ms where you get to pick the color. (Geez man, we all like chocolate, but youre taking things a bit too far, is what the kids say when I tell them we need to fight to protect democracy.)
 
Its like a nightmare version of Intelligence (or, as it used to be called, Wheel of Fortune). They bought up all my words.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 25, 2007
 
Words can have multiple meanings. Its OK. Theres no crime in that. New uses of a word dont detract from old uses.
 
posted by ThomasW
 on March 25, 2007 #
 
Re Newspeak, see Compassionate Commercialism in todays New York Times, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/25/opinion/25gilbert.html
 
posted by John S James
 on March 25, 2007 #
 
// Words can have multiple meanings. Its OK. 
// Theres no crime in that. New uses of a word
// dont detract from old uses.
 
But they do detract from old uses. When the new common definition replaces the old, you lose control of your own language. You lose a bit of capacity for communication. You lose control of your own argument. Outside of physical or legal suppression, is there anything more demeaning to a community?
 
posted by yatta
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
Surely meaning is nothing more than a social contract? Its only a set of agreed rules controlled implicitly by usage, and usage of language is carried out by community and society. Its a collective activity. Thus if the will of the community is to change the meaning of a word, then the members have to keep up with it, or work to maintain the canonical status of their meaning. Only way I can see round this is if valuable meanings are lost - but if theyre not the ones the majority of people want, then we have to have rules about who in which minorities should be able or allowed to define value of meaning, and it seems like were on the slippery slope to technocracy. Which isnt necessarily a good or bad thing, but which is quite hard to defend ethically in the context of the current libertarian and individualist climate.
 
posted by Igor Clark
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
yatta: When I read your response, I immediately recalled the previous discussion about whether it was okay to start a sentence with Me and others Losing control of the language, me am. ;-)
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
Hi! I was stuck here on the freeway doing some Protesting (this new SaudiFund Im driving is a real lemon) when I decided do do some mobile browsing. I had some stale Democracy to munch on, and figured Id just enjoy a little Freedom til the tow truck got here. I happened to notice this little piece in another window. Very funny! Ooops, gotta go  this Democracy is giving me Activism, and I see some bushes over there where I can doff my Liberty. If only I had some TP ah!  these Rights should do nicely! War-out, my bruthas.
 
posted by Gordon McNutt
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
Assume for a moment that theres an alternate set of words for the set of concepts you want to communicate, words that everybody understands and that havent yet been polluted with alternate meanings or dismissive irony.  Is there any good reason to assume youll have that much more success in getting people to be activists or to engage in protest on behalf of your vision of freedom? My gut tells me the problem goes a lot deeper than mere words.
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
heh  privatize the sewers!
 
posted by bub4280
 on May  8, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 23, 2007
 
Title: This Television Life
 
Have you ever listened to that show on NPR, This American Life? I dont know about you, but as far as Im concerned, it has to be one of the most amazing things to ever grace our countrys airwaves. Back when it started, over a decade ago now, it was unlike just about anything you heard on public radio. This wasnt a show about news or music or comedy. It wasnt even, really, a show about people. It was a show about stories, stripped down to their pure essence, people talking to you with a little bit of music in the background.
 
Humans seem to have a natural craving for stories. Whatever the topic, its more fun to hear a story about it. Everyone tells stories. Everyone tells stories, but some people love crafting them until theyre perfect, like little pastries of information with curves in all the right places. And thats what This American Life did each week on the radio: it presented three or four perfectly-crafted stories, all tangentially related to one loose theme, to your car or home for one full hour.
 
A couple years ago the Showtime network called Ira Glass, the head and host of This American Life and asked him if he wanted to make a television version of his show. For most people, getting a call from a television network would be a fairly big deal. But not Glass. Every week, his radio show is heard by 1.6 million people. A hit show on Showtime gets half a million. So Glass said no, there was no way their show would work on television. Still, Showtime persisted, asking what it would take to make it work. So Glass thought of every crazy demand that came to mind. And Showtime met them all.
 
The result, which premieres tonight on the pay-cable Showtime network, has to be one of the most amazing things to grace American television. It is unlike just about anything youve ever seen on TV. The best way I can think to describe it is this: Have you ever seen one of those stock photo movies? You know, the kind with the lusciously oversaturated colors, weird landscapes, and slow-motion movements? The kind of footage that makes the normal world look magical? Now, take that, and imagine an entire television show made out of it. Its absolutely incredible.
 
To promote the show, since Showtime isnt exactly, This American Life went on a six-city tour. I caught them in Chicago, where a jam-packed crowd of dedicated fans (still pissed about the team moving to New York to film the TV show) came to hear What I Learned From Television. We were in the Chicago Theater, a local landmark that holds thousands. And, I have to say, its probably the most fun Ive ever had in a theater.
 
You know how on the radio show, they do these incredibly moving stories that just send chills of emotion down your spine. Now imagine listening to that, in the middle of a crowd of thousands of people who all came out to hear the very same thing. I mean, these were people who cheered individual names in the credits at the end of the show. (Well miss you Elizabeth Meister!) Ive never felt a room so charged with emotion before.
 
So do these guys a favor. Do yourself a favor. Take your Nielsen box and switch it to Showtime tonight at 10:30. Itll be like nothing youve ever felt before.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 23, 2007
 
Aaron,
 
I love your site.  Keep it up.
 
Did you catch Ira Glass talking about making the TV show on Fresh Air?  http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=7600694
 
Somebody also posted some good stuff from him on YouTube.  I put all 4 segments on one page here:
http://thinkorthwim.com/2007/03/04/ira-glass-on-how-to-tell-a-story/
 
posted by Jeff Buscher
 on March 23, 2007 #
 
http://psych.utoronto.ca/~peterson/mom.htm for the page.
 
http://www.psych.utoronto.ca/~peterson/Peterson1.wmv for the story opening. The lecture is called, Theres no such thing as a dragon.
 
This psychologist believes that storytelling is an evolutionary tool that mankind has used for a long time.
 
Its interesting (to me anyway) and the video linked to above runs less than an hour. Hes a pretty good speaker in a laid-back way.
 
Regards,
 
posted by Ken
 on March 23, 2007 #
 
Somethign similar might be Australian Story http://www.abc.net.au/austory/
 
posted by James
 on March 23, 2007 #
 
Actually, the fact that myths from around the world include dragons proves that dinosaurs coexisted with man. ;)
 
Aaron, thanks for the link. People keep telling me to listen to This American Life but I hadnt gotten around to it until now.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on March 23, 2007 #
 
We at Showtime Online express our apologies; however, these pages are intended for access only from within the United States.
 
Apologies not accepted.
 
posted by Pablo Stafforini
 on March 23, 2007 #
 
the KPF* family of stations (Im familiar with L.A. and San Francisco, not sure if theyre elsewhere) used to have a series by a man with the name Joe Frank.  He had a new show most weeks with some light music in the background and told a number of stories.  It gets really interesting because sometimes the stories have a point, sometimes they seem to offer a point but derail right before they get there, leaving you wondering.  Sometimes its just prose about whats going on in his life (for about 3 months he described a prolonged breakup he was going through).  It sounds similar to what youre talking about and theres a wealth of material available if you can find it, but it may take some searching.
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joe_Frank
 
posted by Paul
 on April  4, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 18, 2007
 
Title: How Quantum Mechanics is Compatible with Free Will
 
The actions of almost everything in this world are causally determined by the state of the world that precedes them. Once you start a machine, if no one touches it, its behavior can be predicted entirely in advance from the laws of physics. When you drop a pen down a well, it is physically necessary that it fall.
 
But our behavior doesnt feel that way. When we stick out our tongue it feels as if we had to specifically choose to stick it out, that this was our own action and not a predetermined consequence of the existing state of the world.
 
Some people argue that because the evidence for determinism is so overwhelming, free will must simply be an illusion. But if so, it is a very odd kind of illusion. Most illusions result from a naive interpretation of our senses. For example, in a classic illusion, two drawings of equal size appear to be of different size. But when we are told this is an illusion, we can correct for it, and behave under the new (more accurate) impression that the drawings are in fact of equal size.
 
This simply isnt possible with free will. If someone tells you that you do not actually have free will but have actually been acting under an illusion, you cannot sit back and let determinism take over. When the waiter asks you whether you like soup or salad, you cannot say Oh, well Ive just learned that free will is an illusion and all my actions are completely determined by the previous state of the world, so Ill just let them play themselves out. I mean, you can say that, but the waiter will look at you like youre crazy and you will get neither soup nor salad.
 
It seems overwhelmingly bizarre that evolution would have given us this strangest of illusions. This is not a spandrel, a small place evolution never had time to be concerned about. The illusion of free will affects all aspects of our lives and takes an enormous amount of work. One would think evolution would have eliminated it were it genuinely false.
 
So what is the other possibility? The other possibility is that not all actions are entirely determined by the preexisting state of the world. And, in fact, recent advances in physics seem to show this is somewhat the case. Quantum mechanics suggests that at some fundamental level there is randomness involved in the laws of the world. And chaos theory shows us that small amounts of randomness in a system can have real large-scale effects.
 
So, although it seems extremely improbable, if we have to avoid the improbability of evolution not breeding out an illusory free will, then were forced to look to the randomness of quantum mechanics for an explanation.
 
But, some argue, this is insufficient. Quantum mechanics only gives us randomness  but free will isnt just the pursuit of random behavior, its the pursuit of particular behaviors. While quantum mechanics cant predict each individual bit, it does give overall probability distributions. Volitional behaviors would wreak havoc with those even distributions.
 
Not true. Imagine the simple case where we have one quantum bitstream: a series of zeroes and ones, in which each individual number cannot be predicted, but theres an overall law saying that roughly half of them will be one and half will be zero. And let us simplify the system to say that if the result of the quantum effect is 0 then the person moves left, and if its 1 they move right. In the naive scenario, free will affects this quantum bitstream so that when the person wants to move left the randomness keeps coming up zeroes. But that would violate the laws of physics  the results would no longer be half ones and half zeroes.
 
So heres the trick: first, the system gets a random bit from some other source. Then it adds the bit from the other source with the bit from the quantum bitstream and uses the result to decide if you move left or right. Now, when you want to continually move left, half the time youll have to make the quantum bitstream return zeroes and the other half the time ones  exactly what the laws of quantum mechanics require.
 
With a little additional mathematical complexity, the scenario is generalizable to much more complicated quantum functions and human results. But the basic principle is the same: one can use quantum randomness to exercise free will without violating any statistical laws.
 
Of course, this still leaves one key problem. What is picking the results of this quantum bitstream? And how does it do it? I have to admit I cannot really think of a sensible way. But this seems like a problem for neurobiology to figure out and report back to us. I merely aim to prove that its doing so is consistent with what we know about the laws of physics.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 18, 2007
 
Sounds like youve stumbled upon the same concept Roger Penrose pushes in the last chapter of his book The Emperors New Mind. I recommend the book because its a great examination of many really neat cross-disciplinary concepts, but in my opinion (and I think most peoples) it goes into the weeds when he starts trying to show that quantum randomness can account for human consciousness. As I recall he doesnt claim to even come up with a theory of how that might be, he just tries to show that it might be possible to formulate such a theory. I think Shadows of the Mind does the same but I havent read that.
 
I really dont see the need to try to show that anyway. You write:
 
The illusion of free will affects all aspects of our lives and takes an enormous amount of work. One would think evolution would have eliminated it were it genuinely false.
 
First of all, Im not sure how one could measure the amount of work that an incrementally-more-conscious mind requires. Work is traditionally expressed in terms like caloric expenditure and time requirements. Did you mean that literally?
 
Also, evolution only eliminates genes that are detrimental to the genes propagation. Many falsehoods are beneficial to organisms. For example, humans are predisposed to believe falsehoods about gods that watch over us. (Proving this is trivial: most humans have such belief; most such beliefs are incompatible with the others; at most, one compatible set can be true; therefore, the other belief sets are false.)
 
But is religion harmful? Since it promotes group cooperation, and since were a species that can gain strong benefits from group action, theres no reason to think it is; quite the opposite.
 
Personally I think the illusion of a conscious free will evolved like most other beneficial mutations: incrementally, unplanned of course, and probably quite to the surprise of anyone who would have been watching! Its not hard to imagine how the components came together. An organism whose time flows in one direction will benefit from a brain that remembers the past, looks toward the future, and participates in the present. By conceiving of itself making decisions on a moment-to-moment basis it will best adapt to linear time. Crying out in pain when injured may have initially benefited an organism by inspiring nearby group members to assist, but in a species that lies and unmasks lies, sincerity of pain, feeling it deeply, will inspire the desired response more effectively. A mindset that includes the illusion of the self will have the principle evolutionary advantage of using higher brain functions for self-preservation over the long-term (months), not just the short-term (minutes). Members of a social species will benefit from modeling the mindsets of other individuals; the mental apparatus to put oneself in anothers place is probably very similar to that of envisioning oneself as a conscious entity.
 
In short, I suspect for the particular kind of animal we were x million years ago, the evolutionary mutations that reinforced the illusion of a self were beneficial, while those that weakened this illusion were harmful. In principle (though I dont know how with todays science) the genes and mental apparatus that construct this illusion could be measured. By words like you and me, we refer to this complex illusion that the clockwork machinery was evolved to harbor.
 
Would you like to know what its like to be a collection of self-preserving atoms evolved to appear sincere, to be sincere, to feel deeply, to think of itself as a conscious entity, to behave as though it were a singular actor? Look around you.
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on March 18, 2007 #
 
The other other possibility is that free will hasnt been eliminated simply because its a useful thing for people to believe in. Without a sense of free will, perhaps minds as we understand them simply could not exist?
 
In other words, its an illusionary comfort blanket, but a necessary one.
 
I suspect this is the case; given that there is no evidence that I am aware of for free will, it seems disingenuous to desperately search for explanations that allow it. It feels rather like people trying to prove the bible by hunting for the Ark or the True Cross; those who believe one way or the other are unlikely to be swayed by any evidence that is found.
 
posted by Iain
 on March 18, 2007 #
 
Jamie:
 
Yeah, Penrose strikes me (like everyone else) as pretty crazy.
 
Also, evolution only eliminates genes that are detrimental to the genes propagation. Many falsehoods are beneficial to organisms. For example, humans are predisposed to believe falsehoods about gods that watch over us. (Proving this is trivial: most humans have such belief; most such beliefs are incompatible with the others; at most, one compatible set can be true; therefore, the other belief sets are false.)
 
Youve proved (some of) the beliefs are false, but not that were predisposed to them.
 
Your evolutionary theory only explains a sense-of-self, it doesnt explain the illusion of free will. And while Ill admit I havent formalized the cost of free will (doing so will require some hard thinking) I think the simple strength of the illusion is sufficient to make it a hypothesis worth pursuing, even if fantastically unlikely.
 
Iain:
 
In other words, its an illusionary comfort blanket, but a necessary one.
 
This is of course possible, but I dont see how theres any evidence for it.
 
I suspect this is the case; given that there is no evidence that I am aware of for free will, it seems disingenuous to desperately search for explanations that allow it.
 
The evidence for free will is the case I made. Its fairly strong.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March 18, 2007 #
 
Consider a maze-solving automaton, that is programmed to find its way through a maze using some complicated heuristics, and suppose there are no random numbers involved.
 
Given a maze and knowledge of the algorithm, we can predict what the program will do.  So in that sense its predetermined.  But the fact that it is predetermined is of no particular use to the programmer making up the heuristics, so there would be no need to try to somehow represent that metaknowledge in the heuristics.
 
Similarly, if our actions are predetermined, it would do us no good to have an intimate awareness of that.  Consciousness would be a painful hell if you were saddled with the feeling of just observing your life and having no choice about what you did next.  Im not sure that kind of consciousness would even be possible  you wouldnt have any reason to identify with the body you were apparently riding around in.
 
posted by Chris Bogart
 on March 18, 2007 #
 
Perhaps youve heard of Benjamin Libets readiness potential experiments?
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benjamin_Libet
 
These seem to show that the decision to move is made, in some cases, a large fraction of a second before a person believes theyve made such a decision.  This argues very strongly against free will having any particular role in actions taken on the spur of the moment.  Since such decisions can be experimentally shown to be illusory, why would a completely different real choice mechanism underlie decisions which appear internally to be identically chosen?
 
posted by 
 on March 18, 2007 #
 
Heres a slightly sad interpretation.
 
The Illusion of Free Will is just an artifact of the  brains attempt to make sense of the past.
 
posted by Julian Bond
 on March 18, 2007 #
 
Dammit! Free will is not incompatible with determinism! It is (IMHO) incompatible with indeterminism!
 
Think about it: what do we mean when we say that I chose to eat the chocolate cake? We mean that I was responsible for it. There was something about my mind that caused me to choose the chocolate cake. Now, under determinism, my choosing the cake is directly dependent on my current mental states. They determine my future mental states. My current mental states are my mind, so its fair to say, My mind determines my decisions.
 
Under the quantum mechanics as key to consciousness interpretation, what determines my future mental states? Random static. So, who is responsible for my choices? No one. So, this interpretation actually strips responsibility for my actions away from me and gives it to a coin flip! I want my future choose to rest on me, dammit, not something I dont have any effect on!
 
At any rate, real quantum mechanics is not about randomness at all. Its about how randomness turns out to be really, really regular and predictable, such that if you do a statistically significant number of things, the quantum fuzz all cancels out. So, quantum mechanics is just a mostly deterministic mechanism but with a small margin of error that usually doesnt affect anything significant.
 
Free will as it is often used in public discourse is a contradictory concept. If we give it the provisional definition, my mental states are responsible for my voluntary thoughts and actions, I dont see how there is any contradiction between saying, my brain is responsible for my actions, and, the laws of physics are responsible for my brains actions. Yes, my brain, like the pen falling down the well, is just doing what it naturally will do, but that no more lets my actions come about without my thoughts causing them than a pen could hit a rock at the bottom of a well without the pen itself being the thing that hits the rock.
 
Look at the running of a computer program. Saying I am not responsible for my thoughts because of determinism is like saying that a computer program is not responsible for its output. Certainly, what the computer outputs is naturally a result of what the computer gets in, but also, crucially, what the computer outputs rests on how the program itself responds to the input!
 
posted by Carl
 on March 18, 2007 #
 
Youre getting there, but not there yet. The embryologic program seems to be that some number of pre-neural cells develops and then a critical concentration of some chemical product is produced which causes them to convert to neurons and start extending dendrites and axons to their neighbors. The randomness comes from all the physical input from mom: did she eat radishes for dinner that increased her blood pH for a bit that just delayed the conversion event for another hour while a couple more pre-neurons divided? Did she sleep on her left or her right? Did the embryo implant higher up or further down in the uterus? On the left or the right? Twins? All these things can have tiny little effects on the initial conditions for the neural system.
 
Also, the neural system is a sort of, Im not sure  if its best thought of as an A/D converter or a variable-base logic gate (base two, base three, base 87, etc). See, one neuron reaches out and touches many neighbors. So all the neuron bodies are touched by many neighbors. This is part of the initial conditions, but also part of the reinforcement function. Use it or loose it is a deep principle of neurobiology: if a connection isnt used, then it shrivels and dies. Connections are selected for their utility. Youve got to think about neurobiology, the seat of free will, from the neurons perspective. The brain is a macro manifestation of biology.
 
How do the neurons transmit signals? They release synaptic vesicles, little bubbles full of neurotransmitter subtances, typically glutamate or GABA, but there are modulation subsystems that use dopamine, serotonin, enkaphalins, etc. The vesicles release their contents into the tiny gap between the sending neuron and the receiving neuron, and some of the neurotransmitter molecules land on cell-surface receptors, which triggers the opening and closing of various ion channels on the cell surface, and so you get a voltage change. A little voltage change that dissipates with r^2. Think of ripples on a pond. If I drop rock after rock after rock after rock in quick succession, I build up bigger ripples on the surface. If several of us drop rocks at nearly the same time, the waters surface also get bigger ripples. If a sending neuron releases vesicle after vesicle after vesicle, eventually the sum builds up to an action potential: the receiving neuron sends its own signal down its axon to many other neurons. So too many sending neurons may simultaneously send a bunch of vesicles to the receiving neuron and it suddenly goes from quiescent to sending an action potential.
 
The threshold for an action potential is, eh, something in the vicinity of -25mV. The resting potential is, eh, say, -90mV. These things vary based on local conditions like temperature, pH, and the ion channels involved. Say each vesicle transmits enough neurotransmitter to induce a 2mV change in potential, and that effect decays to near 0 in 1 microsecond. So at a minimum, we need 13 vesicles to be released withing about a microsecond to get the receiving neuron to fire. More likely, well get 30 over 2 microseconds, or maybe one of the vesicles is norepinephrine so we only need 30 over 7 microseconds.
 
Anyway, what happens is you get both spatial and temporal summation of these little bits of input. Its not quantum like quantum mechanics, but they are in fact called quantal potentials. And quantum mechanics is still very much at play: effecting how quickly neurotransmitter molecules diffuse across the synaptic gap (formally the synaptic cleft), exactly how many ions go through each ion channel while its open, etc, etc.
 
So theres a quantum bitstream, but its neurochemical quanta, not electronic quanta. And theres not just one, theres a lot of them. The randomness is induced by the environment, which is itself a quantum mechanical system with some locales where self-organizing, self-replicating chemical systems that predictably coalesced.
 
Whats really cool is that Vintner just published a paper, well, the scientists who work for him published a paper, about DNA he acquired by dipping water out of the middle of the ocean. See, theres no reason to believe the self-organizing, self-replicating system only occured once. Its in fact much more likely that a statistically possible phenomenon occurs many, many times. What they found was that most of the DNA in the samples matched nothing they have ever sequenced. Totally novel microbial DNA. All over the place.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on March 18, 2007 #
 
Yeah, Penrose strikes me (like everyone else) as pretty crazy.
 
You dont think consciousness is made up of quasi-tessellating pentagonal patterns?  Awww
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on March 18, 2007 #
 
I need to correct my statement above: if the resting potential is -90 mV and the threshold for an action potential is -25 mV, and each quantal potential is 2 mV, then you need at least 33 quantal potentials, 33 vesicles of neurotransmitter, to arrive almost simultanously, not 13. (90-25)/2=32.5.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on March 19, 2007 #
 
Aaron,
 
Im usually in greater agreement with you than not, but I fear that this essay trips and falls.  Quantum mechanics doesnt prove anything about free will one way or the other, in any but the most dubious interpretations.
 
Many of the simplest interpretations - like MWI - permit or even insist on determinism, though its often a higher-order kind of determinism.  For example, adopting a strict and infinite MWI position:  the fact that you think you have free will is then merely a function of the fact that the reality you find yourself in, in all probability, is the one which is consistent with the choices you think you made.  That you think you made those choices in this slice of causal reality is independent of all the other choice / belief / causality configurations your infinitely extended self holds.  If you indeed occupy the extended phase space of all possibilities you could could ever face, then free will becomes a less-than-useful, even nonsensical idea.
 
As Im sure you well know, the interpretation of the meaning of the wave function and its collapse is highly susceptible to abuse by non-scientists and scientists alike.  Its becoming quite the trendy epidemic to invoke quantum reasoning in metaphysical / philosophical / psychological mumbo-jumbo-filled bloviations.  (Ive done it myself in the past, and I regret it.)
 
Dont feed the animals. ;-)  Insist on rigor when discussing science.
 
jb
 
posted by Jeff Bone
 on March 19, 2007 #
 
Chinese spam bout diabetes: an act of free will or the cold hand of determinism?
 
posted by Carl
 on March 19, 2007 #
 
Well like you say What is picking the results of this quantum bit stream? And how does it do it?, indeed.  I think we need to define a process, call it you, and prove that the volition to do something is determined by that process.  This you process must be able to supervene on the deterministic universe, otherwise you dont have free will.  It all comes down to proving that tricky relationship called supervene.  You can read more about that relationship in The Conscious Mind by David Chalmers.  The advantage of formulating the question this way is that you dont need to rely upon the quantum world and some unknown mechanism to justify a belief in free will, because the you process can supervene on any mechanism, whether it be quantum or neurological or  social or a combination of all of those.  The only requirement is that the you process determines the volition and can supervene on the physics of the real universe.
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on March 19, 2007 #
 
Wait! Ive got it! Theres a part of us that is non-physical and non-deterministic, and it interfaces to our brains through a mechanism we do not yet understand. IT is responsible for free will, while the physical stuff continues to be essentially deterministic. If only I could think of a good name for this thing, I bet the idea would really catch on!
 
posted by Gordon McNutt
 on March 19, 2007 #
 
Quantum mechanics only gives us randomness
 
I think quantum mechanics gives us less than that.
 
We have no way (no deterministic way) to describe why individual particles exhibit wavelike behavior.  A probability distribution is the closest match to what we observe in the lab.  Thats basic quantum mechanics (the math behind the probability distributions).
 
There are other postulates (Heisenbergs principle) which claim the basic nature of reality is irreducible from such probability distributions.  Thats a whole new claim.
 
Im not so sure the claim is true.  Before Newtons laws of motion were known, you couldnt predict the outcome of a flipped coin - you could flip 100 coins and make a decent probability distribution.  A person before Newton might strongly believe that the result of a single coin flip was fundamentally unpredictable.
 
Suppose a deterministic explanation for quantum mechanics was discovered - a way to exactly calculate the individual actions that, in aggregate, produced the probability distributions described by quantum mechanics.
 
Would quantum mechanics still be compatible with free will?
 
posted by Lloyd Dalton
 on March 19, 2007 #
 
I have a book (ISBN 0-13-165945-6) that suggests free will is an illusion; using a computer-science complexity argument.
 
Like a computer of finite speed your mind has not enough capacity to simulate itself in real time (the circuits used for the simulation necessarily being somewhat less than the whole).  Hence possible determinism while being unable to know your own future.
 
posted by peter
 on March 19, 2007 #
 
I have to agree with the no-free-willers Im afraid. Its not surprising you have to introduce some other source to get your free will picture right. Basically I think it doesnt make THAT much of a difference whether you affect the quantum bitstream directly or add to it from some other source. Without this other source, presumably an agent or what religious people call soul, theres no free will. Of course one cannot COMPLETELY rule out we have free will, but that put aside, would it really be so bad not to have it? I say no. Without free will, one can still live AS IF one had free will because often the concept simply tends to make life less complicated. However, one should know that there is not really any such thing as ultimate responsibility for ones actions, which can free you from or at least alleviate guilt and shame as well as the ludicrous amounts of pride and arrogance many people display with regard to their fantastic accomplishments. Im sorry if any anti-free will stuff disheartens people who want to believe in free will. In most cases though, as with religious people, they make up for the lack of evidece with an extra big portion of confidence. Thats why outside the internet, in real life, Im a hard determinist in the closet. And I dont intend to come out any time soon.
 
posted by Stan
 on March 20, 2007 #
 
Stan, there are other sources: initial conditions and environmental input, both of which are highly random. Wikipedias article on free will is excellent. Im very much in the neuroscience camp where free will is a matter of how much.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on March 20, 2007 #
 
Free will is free, not because it contradicts physical determinism, but because it contradicts psychological determinism. By psychological determinism, I mean the assumption that a person will always do whatever they want to do in that particular moment. Thus there is a conflict between two opposing forces in the brain, one representing desire, and the other representing willpower. Neither of these opponents always prevails.
 
On the one hand, if desire always prevailed, then we would be just like other animals. (Assuming that non-human animals have no willpower is probably an oversimplification, as there is evidence to suggest that some of our closer relatives sometimes exert their own willpower.).
 
On the other hand, if willpower always prevailed, then our behaviour would too readily become disconnected from biology.
 
The exact rules for deciding which force prevails and which doesnt may be rather complex, and determining what those rules are is equivalent to solving the problem of what free will is.
 
I have written up more of my thinking on this subject at http://www.1729.com/consciousness (including an article Why Roger Penrose is Wrong, which might be of interest to some of the other commenters here).
 
posted by Philip Dorrell
 on March 20, 2007 #
 
Great, so youve shown how our choices are random. How is that compatible with free will?
 
posted by Peter
 on March 20, 2007 #
 
Great, so youve shown how our choices are random. How is that compatible with free will?
 
posted by Peter
 on March 20, 2007 #
 
Visual illusions arent the only kinds of illusions our minds fall victim to if youre looking for comparisons to what is reffered to as free will, why not compare similar illusions - like those of a soul, or of some deep connection to humanity, or of God?
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on March 20, 2007 #
 
Anyone that believes in chaos or randomness is a fool. By no means can something ever operate on its own. Without affecting things around it, without being affected by things around it. Come on, think about it! How can something be unlinked to the world? Because thats what it means to have random behavior. It means that there is nothing that causes the effect. The only reason to call something random is simply because we do not know what the causes for the effect are, but thats pretty darn far away from having no causes at all.
 
Free will is not an illusion, nor do we have any free will. The only reason we think we have a free will is simply because we do not know all causes for the effects that sums up our actions. You can train yourself on this matter. When a thought strikes you, ask yourself where it came from. Wasnt it that sign I walked past a minute ago that triggered a memory that was associated with another memory.etc. Do it. Youll be surprised how soon youll get to know your brain, what really triggers you. Of course, you can only scratch the surface this way.
 
OK, so if there is a cause for every effect, then we could find the ultimate reason, right? The one reason that set it all off. No, because the Universe is infinite. Deal with it.
 
posted by John
 on March 22, 2007 #
 
The example you gave, that one cant give up making referents to oneself and stating intentionality, does not serve as an illustration of free will.
 
First, its an artifact of English that one must always use a first person pronoun. Second, we exist in a cultural milieu that is utterly dependent upon  the maintenance of a cultural sense of free agency; Restaurants themselves are a construct of the enlightenment.
 
You are presumably aware of the wide variation between what a person can report as their intentionality and the actual processes involved; singular examples, like people with certain types of neuronal damage, and those individuals who had their corpus callosum severed in order to prevent their epileptic fits, illustrate that our narrative of self-hood is only in loose association with what is going on.
 
The complexity of the process by which people select among their behaviours and actions for those that they will include in their sense of self never fails to amaze me in its complexity, yet the evolutionary advantage of the ability to socially model others seems potent enough to explain why we choose to elevate the model of the monkey in the mirror to a state of some prominence.
 
posted by Ethan Fremen
 on March 22, 2007 #
 
What does chaos theory have to do with randomness? Fractals are completely deterministic, yet you still cant predict what any part will look like.
 
Determinism does not equal predictability. This whole debate seems pretty narrow-minded and pedestrian to me.
 
We know today that the way thinking works is roughly by firing neuron patterns that feed back until a signal has sufficiently self-amplified to cross a threshold. The brain is a pattern matcher driven by innumerable feedback loops  a boundlessly non-linear system.
 
So what if its deterministic? It wont do you any good to know that it is.
 
posted by Aristotle Pagaltzis
 on March 25, 2007 #
 
Hello folks.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 23, 2007 #
 
that all sounds for me like in this movie (what the bleep we know i think that was the title) where they talk about the possibilities to change your life, the world or the universe, alone with the power of your mind.
 
but i think the main questions is what is reality? when you can see something? (an eagle see much more than you, is he in an other reality than you) or if you hear something? (an owl hear by far more than you).
 
im really interested in this kind of stuff and would like to hear/read more of that. have we some 
professors here to tell us more?
 
posted by Josephine
 on May 12, 2007 #
 
Interesting topic.  No need to speculate about this level of mechanism, there are good empirical approaches.
 
For example, we can build on this article about the detailed dynamics and neural mechanisms of changes in conscious perception.
 
They do this basically by setting up a situation in which they can observe, and to some extent control, extended shifts in how something looks to the subject.  They do this by layering two tricks.
 
The first trick is binocular rivalry.  If our two eyes see visually incompatible things, first one and then the other tends to dominate.  Normally ones perceptions switch spontaneously and somewhat unpredictably.
 
This phenomenon is especially relevant because much of the brain is actually processing the input from both eyes, but at some point only one or another input is passed on to consciousness.  (This has been determined by Logothetis through invasive experiments with monkeys.)
 
The second trick is to make the dominance switching much slower and more controllable.  The authors of the paper I cite did this by making the conflicting part of the image into a ring.  The switch then moves around the ring and takes a few seconds to complete.  Also, they found they could initiate a switch by changing the contrast momentarily at some spot on the ring  the change would then start at that spot and propagate.
 
Furthermore they found they could observe the change propagating in the brain, along a retintopic map, essentially a distorted version of the ring in part of the visual cortex.
 
They are able to accurately model the observed dynamics with a fairly straightforward neural network.
 
So is this relevant?  Yes, I think it is easy to transpose this pattern from spontaneous conscious perceptions to spontaneous conscious choices.
 
Suppose we have multiple evaluation processes operating at a unconscious or marginally conscious level.  Some might be converging on the same action, others on some competing action, etc.  Consciously, the options may seem to grow or shrink spontaneously until one displaces all the others, or until we get tired of thinking about the problem (also an outcome of a dynamic evaluation process).
 
The factors that create a sense of choosing are (1) the extended unconscious dynamics of competing evaluation processes and (2) the way the conscious manifestations of those processes can be affected but not fully controlled by attention.
 
posted by Jed Harris
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
Yeah, quantum consciousness and bit streams reek of what the bleep do we know?
 
I dont really see any reason to try preserving free-will anymore. It is a conclusion in search for evidence. Generally, people think of free-will as some agent being the pan-ultimate cause of their actions. That full knowledge of the present cannot lead to a 100% prediction of the future. Throwing in some QM randomness doesnt help it as now one controls that randomness.
 
Most evidence suggest approximate determinism for large systems like brains. The above usual definition of free will is not compatible with such determinism. Compatibalists like Hobbes and Dennet have their own definitions. Hobbes looks at how constrained and coerced an agents will feels. Dennet focuses on evitability of negate events (and presumedly ability to seek positive ones).
 
If you want free-will, it seems better to start with a new definition, rather than trying to salvage a concept that is refuted by all existing evidence. One of the few things I agree with Dennet on is what makes the pan-ultimate cause definition so great? Agents in a determined system are  not inherently less able to seek good things/avoid bad things than then those in a free-will universe.
 
As for responsibility, it is another dead end. I believe in prevention, which can include deterrents. But the idea of punishing anyone in what seems to be a determinist system is as silly as punishing a computer or a tree for not doing what you want. You might as well curse at the Laws of Physics. Why punish someone for stealing candy but not a retarded person for being annoying and stupid? I cant accept the later, but I cant take one without the other; I dont care for the whole concept. Responsibility and accountability may be useful words as heuristics for prevention however, but not real heavy-weight concepts.
 
posted by Aaron Schulz
 on January 29, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 16, 2007
 
Title: Write Web Works With Me!
 
Are you a student? Looking for a summer job? Heres the deal: We come up with an idea. You spend the summer implementing it. Google pays you $4500. The code gets released as free software. Its called Summer of Code.
 
Me and others on the web.py mailing list have drawn up a list of potential project ideas. My personal favorites are the stats package, where you implement a decent log analysis package for web applications; a task I think both exciting, not too hard, and long overdue, and teh communicator, where you use Ajax push to build a web app that combines the best features of IRC and mailing lists. But feel free to come up with your own if you think you have some good ideas. (Or ask me if you have questions about mine.)
 
Once youve got something that seems appealing, fill out the application form. Describe the project youre interested in working on and set the organization to Python Software Foundation. Then feel free to send me an email introducing yourself and letting me know about your application. Applications are due next week, so you might want to hurry.
 
Once the applications are in, me and the other mentors will be looking through them and deciding which ones to accept. So its in your best interest to make the application sound compelling and you sound competent.
 
And spread the word!
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 16, 2007
 
In terms of sounding competent, I think you meant to say, the other mentors and I will be looking..
 
posted by Grammar Mom
 on March 16, 2007 #
 
Me and Bobby McGee, Me and Brother Bill Went Hunting, etc.
 
Prescriptionists beware: the phrase me and  stands as a valid form and relieves the me of its being required to be in subjective form - me is not the subject of the sentence, me and the other mentors is.
 
BTW, why dont you and Sean write the definitive editor for entries/edits of Wikipedia with all the little features (including accessibility) that will make it trivial for folks like me to participate more comfortably in the important job of perfecting the Wikipedia?
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on March 16, 2007 #
 
I is the subject pronoun. Me is the object pronoun.
 
http://data.grammarbook.com/blog/?p=15
 
posted by Grammar Mom
 on March 17, 2007 #
 
Hate to belabo(u)r this seemingly trivial point, but
 
Are language usage issues to be decided by prescription or description? Largely the latter, particularly since the rules of the former are acknowledgedly based on the latter!
 
In the current brouhaha, the issue is whether the parts of a phrase used as a subject (me and others on the web) must, if pronouns, be of their subject form.
 
Stragely enough, what sounds right, although heavily dependent on context, is most often the final deciding vote in this matter. It is quite clear (at least to me and I suppose most descriptionists) that me and the other members will be looking has a more fitting sound in the current context than I and the other - and the comma before me and the other mentors makes it clear and makes it sound right.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on March 17, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 14, 2007
 
Title: Hating John Searle
 
Title: 2 does not necessarily follow from #1, in a very deep reasons. A program which could pass the Turing Test might be too complex to write it down in a book in any practical sense. You cant even write it down in a book in practice all the software that runs a modern computer operating system - that is, the source code is just too huge. Sure, you can start playing games, and say its a big, big, book with tiny, tiny, fonts, but then that is just saying its information.
 
I think John Searle might be my favorite living philosopher. But when I tell my friends this, they recoil in horror. That bastard? one friend cries. He tripled my rent! Oh geebus, another cries. The Chinese Room argument is awful.
 
I will not profess to have an opinion on whether the fourteenth amendment requires the City of Berkeley to provide a rational basis for only allowing its landlords to raise rents at forty percent of the increase in the consumer price index, but I must admit I fail to see what the question has to do with Searle as a philosopher.
 
The other complaint seems less ad hominem, but I think is fundamentally similar. Reading Searles published books, its striking how little space the Chinese Room Argument takes up. Indeed, his book on the subject of consciousness  The Rediscovery of the Mind  gives it little more than a paragraph and notes that his more recent argument against functionalism is far more powerful.
 
Nonetheless, I will defend the Chinese Room Argument. The basic idea, for those who arent familiar with it, is this: imagine yourself being placed in a room and given instructions on how to convert one set of Chinese symbols to another. To outsiders, if the instructions are good enough, it will seem as if you understand Chinese. But you do not consciously understand Chinese  you are simply following instructions. Thus, no computer can ever consciously understand Chinese, because no computer does more than what youre doing  its simply following a set of instructions. (Indeed, being unconscious, its doing far less.)
 
The Chinese Room Argument works mainly as a forcing maneuver. There are only two ways out of it: you can either claim that no one is conscious or that everything is conscious. If you claim that no one is conscious, then there is no problem. Sure, the man doesnt consciously understand Chinese, but he doesnt consciously understand English either. However, I dont think anyone can take this position with a straight face. (Even Daniel Dennett is embarrassed to admit it in public.)
 
The alternative is to say that while perhaps the man doesnt consciously understand Chinese, the room does. (This is functionalism.) I think its pretty patently absurd, but Searle provides a convincing refutation. Functionalists argue that information processes lead to consciousness. Running a certain computer program, whether on a PC or by a man with a book or by beer cups and ping pong balls, will cause that program to be conscious. Searle points out that this is impossible; information processes cant cause consciousness because theyre not brute facts. We (conscious humans) look at something and decide to interpret it as an information process; but such processes dont exist in the world and thus cant have causal powers.
 
Despite the obvious weakness of the arguments, why do so many of my friends continue to believe in functionalism? The first thing to notice is that most of my friends are computer programmers. Theres something about computer programming that gets you thinking that the brain is nothing more than a special kind of program.
 
But once you do that, youre stuck. Because one property of computer programs is that they can run on any sort of hardware. The same program can run on your Mac or a PC or a series of gears and pulleys. Which means it must be the program thats important; the hardware cant be relevant. Which is patently absurd.
 
I used to think that part of the reason my friends believed this was because they had no good alternatives. But Ive since explained to them Searles alternative  consciousness is a natural phenomenon which developed through evolutionary processes and is caused by the actions of the brain in the same way solidity is caused by the actions of atoms  and it hasnt caused them to abandon their position one bit.
 
So I tried a different tack. I asked them what they thought was wrong with Searles position. And the answer always seems to come down to a confusion between ontology and epistemology. Ontology is a fancy word for the facts of the matter  what actually exists out in the world. And epistemology is the world for the way we know about it. Unless you subscribe to a bizarre philosophical theory, things in the world exist irrespective of whether we know them or not. Behind the TV game show door, there either is a car or there isnt, even if no one can see in to tell which one is the case. Furthermore, things continue to exist even if we cant even know them in principle. There appears to be no way for me to ever tell what it feels like for you to taste an orange; nonetheless, there is indeed something that it feels like for you.
 
My programmer friends argument always ends up coming down to this: if a computer program acted conscious, if it plaintively insisted that it was conscious, if it acted in all respects like the conscious people we know in the real world, then it must be conscious. How could we possibly tell if it was not? In short, they believe in the Turing Test as a test for consciousness  anything that acts smart enough to make us think its conscious must be conscious.
 
This was the position Ned Block was trying to refute when he postulated a computer program known as Blockhead. Blockhead is a very simple (although very large) computer program. It simply contains a list of all possible thirty minute conversations. When you say something, Blockhead looks it up in the list, and says whatever the list says its supposed to say next. (Obviously such a list would be unreasonably long in practice, perhaps even when heavily compressed, but let us play along theoretically.)
 
Having a conversation with Blockhead would be just like having a conversation with a real person. But nobody could seriously claim the program was conscious, right? Well, in fact they do.
 
One wonders whether these people think their cell phones are conscious. After all, talking to a properly-enabled cell phone works just like talking to a properly-enabled person! (I asked one friend this and his response was that the whole system containing the cell phone and the wires and the person on the other end was conscious.)
 
The point is that we dont assign consciousness purely based on behavior. Blockhead acts like its conscious and a completely paralyzed person acts like theyre not, yet we all know that the first isnt conscious and the second is. Instead, we assign consciousness based on causes. We know dogs are conscious because we know they have brains that are very much like ours which cause behavior very much like ours. We dont make that judgment based on behavior alone.
 
Criticisms aside, what is the positive argument for John Searle? First, he has done important work in a wide variety of fields. As far as I can tell, he began following up the works of his teachers (like J. L. Austin) on the topic of speech acts, which he generalized to the subject of intentionality, which he solved by saying it was a property of conscious beings, which led him to develop a theory of consciousness. Second, all of his points seem quite reasonable to me and (with a few exceptions) I agree with them. Third, he writes extremely clearly and entertainingly and for a popular audience.
 
These three seem like a fairly low bar  theyre about what I would expect from myself were I a philosopher  but its shocking how few prominent philosophers seem to meet them. Daniel Dennett is a dreadfully prolix writer and is insane. Thomas Nagel comes close but is a fairly committed dualist. Hilary Putnam doesnt write for a popular audience. Peter Singer doesnt seem to develop any actual theories. So I cant think of any. Can you? Suggestions appreciated in the comments.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 14, 2007
 
What about the Norwegian philosopher Arne Nss? He also writes for a popular audience and has coined the ideas such as deep ecology and ecological wisdom
 
posted by Albert Francis
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
There are only two ways out of it: you can either claim that no one is conscious or that everything is conscious
 
Third way: consciousness is a VARIABLE, not a BINARY.
 
That is, everything is conscious is like everything has a temparature - theres a range from 0 to a very high level. Were predisposed to read everything is conscious like everything is hot, which sounds absurd, but thats just because of language usage.
 
I would say a lot of trouble is hidden in the words given instructions on how to convert one set of Chinese symbols to another. It may be that this turns out to mean something like a conscious mind, or access to one in some manner in practice. That is, its not really an argument, but a tautology, basically another artifact of non-rigorous language (i.e, circularly arguing that its a mere set of instructions, and minds are taken to be much more glorious than a set of instructions, so if a set of instructions can do what a mind does, a mind must be something else).
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
I think part of the problem of liking Searle the philosopher is dealing with the arrogant, blowhard you will encounter if you ever have the opportunity to take one of his classes.
 
posted by talboito
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
Have you read anything by David Chalmers?
 
posted by Mike Bruce
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
One of my own favorite contemporary philosophers, Susan Haack, certainly meets your three criteria of importance, reasonableness, and writing clearly for a popular audience:
 
http://www.as.miami.edu/phi/haack/SummaryBio.htm
 
posted by Kermit Snelson
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
The point is that we dont assign consciousness purely based on effects. Blockhead acts like its conscious and a completely paralyzed person acts like theyre not, yet we all know that the first isnt conscious and the second is.
 
Actually, we do assign consciousness purely based on effects. The only things we perceive of the world are through our senses, which are effects in the physical world. Theres no other way for us to assign consciousness.
 
Yet we all know - what kind of argument is that? No, we dont all know - thats incredibly lazy thinking. You have to back up your assertions with some logic.
 
Searle points out that this is impossible; information processes cant cause consciousness because theyre not brute facts.
 
What does this mean? A lot of philosophers dont understand computers, but computers are brute facts - you can touch them - and also information processes, because they use the physical laws of the universe to perform computations.
 
Because one property of computer programs is that they can run on any sort of hardware. The same program can run on your Mac or a PC or a series of gears and pulleys. Which means it must be the program thats important; the hardware cant be relevant. Which is patently absurd.
 
Why is it patently absurd? You need to get away from these lazy assertions, and actually provide some reasons, and, you know, a logical argument. As you know, all machines which are Turing-equivalent can model any computation (see your computer science education for the proof), and the physical laws of the universe can be used to model a Turing-equivalent machine (see any desktop computer as an evidence-based fact), therefore in a very real way, the hardware is not relevant. It couldnt really be more clear to me!
 
FWIW, I view the universe as a computation, and a long time ago - about the age of 13 or so - I came around to the conclusion that any computation in the universe is indistinguishable from free will / consciousness. If you replaced every one of the neurons in your head with a miniature device that acted like a neuron, then thered be no effective difference in your behaviour, yet now your brain would be formed out of components we could model in a computer - down to the low-level physical laws, if necessary. It seems to me, that following this line of reasoning, all that is required to simulate a conscious being inside a computer (and  by analogy the Chinese Room), is a thorough understanding of (1) physics and (2) the physical structure of neurons and their interconnections.
 
Would the result be conscious? Well, guess what - I dont know that youre conscious. Nobody knows anything about anybody elses consciousness. We just have to believe what they say when they say theyre conscious, so instead, it comes down to intelligence. And the only criteria we have for deciding intelligence - in spite of your objections, which you havent backed up - are the senses we receive, i.e. the input into the brain, which is formed completely from the output of the simulation. I view the Turing test as a thought experiment that demonstrates that we evaluate intelligence only through outward behaviour - its the only way we can evaluate anything - and therefore intelligence can be simulated.
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
Just one further point, after remembering a few things. Many philosophers theorizing about consciousness still still use homunculus-based approaches, e.g. see:
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homunculus#The_homunculus_argument_or_fallacy_in_the_philosophy_of_mind
 
Many philosophers have tried to use infinite regression of homunculi as an argument that theres something special, or magical, about the human mind, without realizing that the physical laws of the universe can themselves form a very simple homunculus, terminating the infinite regression - thus many disproofs of theories based on infinite regression are actually incorrect.
 
The Chinese Room argument is similar: we see inside the box (were given special knowledge of how the box, aka the brain, works) to see the literal homunculus, and therefore its obvious, or patently clear that it (the whole system) is not conscious.
 
Problem is, would we make the same claim if we knew exactly what was inside the human skull-box? If not, why not? Is it any different?
 
To me, the human skull-box and the Chinese Room are perfectly analogous. The homunculus is literal in the Chinese Room, but its the physical laws of the universe in a brain or a computer. The instructions and book in the Chinese Room are the physical state and structure of the brains neurons. It seems to me that if you support the thesis that the Chinese Room is not conscious, then you believe that the human mind is not conscious.
 
posted by Barry Kelly
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
Jerry Fodor. The scope of his work is not as extensive as Searles, but its definitely important (he provides the best arguments for the so-called cognitivist approach) and has contributed very original ideas about the structure of the mind. It is a pleasure to read him - you could read any of his works without any previous knowledge of the matter and still benefit from them.
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
Seth writes:
 
Third way: consciousness is a VARIABLE, not a BINARY.
 
Its both, like one of those dimmer light switches that clicks when going to zero. Saying that thermostats have some level of consciousness (as Chalmers seems to do) just strikes me as crazy and thats not a trick of language.
 
I would say a lot of trouble is hidden in the words given instructions on how to convert one set of Chinese symbols to another. It may be that this turns out to mean something like a conscious mind, or access to one in some manner in practice.
 
Huh? Were assuming the theoretical possibility that building a computer program to solve the Turing Test is possible. Then were writing the program down in human language as instructions in a book. The book is not a conscious mind. This may turn out not to actually be possible in reality, but thats why its a thought experiment. This is also not an artifact of language.
 
talboito:  Yes, Searle does come off as a bit arrogant even in writing. But Ive learned to tolerate some level of arrogance.
 
Barry caught a typo which Ive now fixed (I had effects instead of behavior. His other arguments dont seem particularly convincing to me  he falls for exactly the trap I state: he confuses epistemology with ontology.
 
I should clarify that this piece is not meant to be a rigorous philsophical argument, just a reflection on recent events. The reason Ive been talking to people about this stuff is that Ive been working on the more rigorous piece.
 
Barry: The difference between the Chinese room and the brain is that brains cause consciousness.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
I think you are unfair to poor old Mr. Dennett. His usual argument against this kind of thing holds up well to the Blockhead case, for example:
 
When you say Obviously such a list would be unreasonably long in practice, perhaps even when heavily compressed, but let us play along theoretically. you are asking us to play along with something unrealistic - and thats the problem. How long is unreasonably long - well, think how big a list of all 30-minute conversations are. If each word could be followed by one of 10 others, and speech happens at 1 word per second, then thats 10^(180) conversations. So it is reasonable to say No - I will not play along, even theoretically.
 
posted by tom s.
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
I meant to finish with end of conversation - intelligent or otherwise
 
posted by tom s.
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
What is it about functionalism that allows it to resist thought experiments? Functionalists certainly like to have their zombies.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
What is your definition of consciousness?
 
You are arguing what it means to be conscious but havent defined what consciousness is.
 
posted by Sean Abrahams
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
Which means it must be the program thats important; the 
  hardware cant be relevant. Which is patently absurd.
 
Why is it patently absurd?
 
 things in the world exist irrespective of whether we know 
  them or not.
 
At the macroscopic scale, yes. Once you get into quantum mechanics all bets go out the window (cats in boxes and such).
 
The difference between the Chinese room and the brain is that 
  brains cause consciousness.
 
Are we sure that the brain isnt just a Chinese box? Do we understand enought about it to say this?
 
posted by David Magda
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
Boy howdy, do I wish I could talk to you about this in person. This question has been irritating me since I took my first cog sci course, and Ive never spoken about it to anyone whod even heard of this functional argument against the Chinese room. It might have been addressed in that very class, I just wasnt much of a student.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
We know dogs are conscious
 
bowwow?
 
posted by Really?
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
I dont go in much because I think you are only playing with American tradition context. But the word consciousness - and epistemology or ontology - these arent used very well in this piece.
 
Lets say Babbage probably didnt think of Turing test (He didnt. Wicked enough!). But maybe kids in the bedroom given teddy bears to play with (19th century?) gave souls and everything they could give - to their teddy bears.
 
Then Turings test came. (and yeah Strong AI school, bit later, with some very particular kid of information theory thing) And then ripples in the pond.
 
But then you got Johns Hopkinss Ben Carsons one argument - or suggestion about the topic of the argument, why we let other humans to waste what their brains potentially got.
 
Say we all got good enough hardwares, but we dont want to install softwares, and we tolerate hardwares being wasted with bad, poorly written softwares. (Go Tenderloin or Hunters point or Richmond in east bay or East Oakland, say. You see potential Mac Tower Pro or supercomputers playing  - or stuck with - 30 years old Atari games - or even something less than that.)
 
He did that argument in some places - in talk to public, and seems it didnt fly.
 
So we are going back to teddy bears again. Such a cool argument. I cant wait to see your real piece.
 
posted by IT kids are concerned about CPUs huh?
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
Its an old book so there may now be better but, The Minds I goes through all of this (as does Permutation City, mind-blowingly, by Greg Egan). I dont claim that the following is Hofstadters answer though.
 
I think its possible that a human could animate a stop-motion consciousness, with symbols etc. And that, I wouldnt have a problem with accepting as conscious.
 
What youve put as Searles big comeback about causality I dont understand. I certainly dont think that processing information makes machines conscious. I dont know what you or Searle are arguing, so maybe Im on your side and dont realize it but, I distrust any argument that takes concepts that are pre-experience or understanding of what consciousness is, and tries to run with them. Minsky sums it up for me:
 
It is too easy to say things like, Computers cant do (xxx), because they have no feelings, or thoughts. But heres a way to turn such sayings into foolishness. Change them to read like this. Computer cant do (xxx), because all they can do is execute incredibly intricate processes, perhaps millions at a time. Now, such objections seem less convincing  yet all we did was face one simple, complicated fact: we really dont yet know what the limits of computers are. Now lets face the other simple fact: OUR NOTIONS OF THE human MIND ARE JUST AS PRIMITIVE. (my emphasis)
 
posted by Mind's I Reader
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
I havent read the above comments. I suppose I should. What if Blockhead had no record of conversations, only a set of rules hardwired in, and a large but lossy memory, and a clock that wasnt quite perfect. He, lets call Blockhead he, I think theres a Peanuts character named Blockhead, or at least on of them calls another Blockhead. Anyway
 
Blockhead, over time, receives audio input and one of his hard-wired rules is to drive a speaker at varying frequencies. Another rule is to keep track of how many times a particular driven pattern through the speaker is followed by another pattern. And record all of this, again, in a lossy sort of way. Loosing some random fraction of whats been collected, at a rate that falls off with time. That is, theres always a lot coming in, so Blockhead is always shedding a lot of recent data, but there is a pile of old stuff that slowly builds up. And even some of that is lost, but the rate functions are balanced so theres a slow accumulation. Another rule is to pattern-match. Pattern-match all sorts of things, and assign those patterns over time, the ones that happen so frequently they arent lost, assign random names to those patterns, and put those random names at specific addresses. And even those addresses will be lost if they arent reinforced. But another rule Blockhead follows is to repeat driving patterns on the speaker if a pattern of response is detected. Add in a rule to favor own survival over survival of another.
 
Over, and over, and over. All the time. Hell develop grammar, syntax, style. A sense of time. A sense of rules for conversation. Confabulating many possible responses, he will have access to rules, tried over time, that allow him to choose some confabulations that are better than others, and drive the speaker with those.
 
Maybe throw in some additional shortcuts. Add a video feed. Favor visual patterns with a lot of green on the bottom, and blue on top. Favor visual patterns that look like this :) only rotated 90 clockwise. Add in the ability to distinguish chemical smells and  similar lossy association patterns can be ruled between smells and :) patterns and green/blue patterns, and certain audio patterns.
 
Make Blockhead reproducible, with a lossy pattern of the program. Make a pattern such that Blockheads cant tolerate another Blockhead whos responses vary too far from the patterns that he recognized in the the first few years of life. Make Blockhead want to destroy Blockheads that dont match the pattern. Youll have Blockheads that more and more efficiently learn to recognize patterns, and youll have clusters of Blockheads. Predictably, Blockheads near the borders of their clusters will at once destroy each other more often, and end up with new patterns and an urge to integrate the groups. Ill bet they even naturally select code patterns that the original designer never predicted, more closely aligned to survival in their environment.
 
Dont give me the usual crap about random numbers not being truly random. Schrodingers equations assure us that those tiny little atoms that cause solids (please, causation hasnt a thing to do with it. Have you considered that it just is? Maybe the math just fell out that way in this particular instance of a universe?) will eventually induce measurable randomness into the clock. Even NISTs clocks arent perfect. Not perfect.
 
How much. odds. These things are fundamental.
 
Random chance and self-repeating patterns condensing out of a huge chaos over vast amounts of time. Causation at the quantum level and causation at the level of human affairs are two things that follow different rules. Not because theres a definitional difference in causation, but because there are so many how many, how much questions of probability in between.
 
Of course the biological Blockhead is self-aware by every possible test and entirely able to transcribe meaningless symbols. Pattern-matching and lossy memory and a fuzzy clock over time lead to this mental model.
 
The academies of philosophers and economists suffer from the same failure of mind: we can confabulate any situation there ever could be, but it only gets interesting when we start trying to find out how much. Pursuing theory without observation is tantamount to murder. So is observation without doubt.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
Saying that thermostats have some level of consciousness (as Chalmers seems to do) just strikes me as crazy and thats not a trick of language.
 
Its like saying an ice cube has some level of heat. So you react Thats crazy! An ice cube is cold, not hot!. Would it sound crazy to say (a similar but not identical idea) thermostats have some level of reaction to their environment? Its obviously talking about a trivially small amount of a quantity we think of, linguistically, in terms of a high level of the quantity. It would help to distinguish between temperature (the quantity) and hot (high level the quantity). The trick of language is that consciousness is used in both senses (like the word heat).
 
Huh? Were assuming the theoretical possibility that building a computer program to solve the Turing Test is possible.
 
Thats right. ASSUMING! The point is that assumption itself is arguably circular or tautological. The artifact of language is that it allows you to hide that circularity or tautology from inspection. Its like Maxwells Demon: assume we could distinguish between hot and cold (high and low energy) particles, then  We are assuming that  In theory  The problem here is that it turns out that to do the operation of distinguish is dubious, in terms of possibly taking more energy itself. Similarly, the glib phrase of writing the program down in human language as instructions in a book may not be possible in way that doesnt turn out to be, in practice, create an artificial intelligence.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
This piece was way below par for you Aaron. Most of the things that you said were obviously the case are not at all obvious. It is like a Christian saying well obviously God exists - obvious to a Christian yes, but not to an Athiest. You just made a load of unsubstantiated statements of faith.
 
For what its worth, all of Dennets points seem quite reasonable to me, but I wouldnt go so far as to say that they are obviously true, because they clearly arent from your perspective. I admit I havent read widely on the subject (Penrose and Hofstadter are my other two main jumping off points) but I have had quite a few more years than you to mull it over.
 
It seems to me that you are simply defining consciousness as something that occurs in brains. If we accept your definition the clearly it cant occur in computers. That is no better or worse than defining conciousness as whatever property is shared between all potential systems that could pass a Turing test, it is just a different definition. Whatever definition of consciousness we might come up with, clearly it should apply to human beings (both the above definitions do). Beyond that, who can say whether an ant is concious whereas a hypothetical computer program that passes the Turing test is not? Or the other way round? It entirely depends what you mean by the word.
 
In fact, some people say that human beings are not conscious in general and that consciousness is only achieved in certain enlightened beings after years of meditation etc. Or that there is only a single Universal consciousness etc.
 
Answers are meaningless unless you know what the question is and I dont think we do. It is like asking for the answer to Life,
the Universe and Everything.
 
I expect better from you and look forward to a future post on the subject in which you actually have something substantive to say.
 
posted by Ian Gregory
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
Well this is a fascinating topic that Ive been thinking a lot about lately. I have not studied it much yet, so I may be ignorant of one thing or another. But I have to say that Aarons argument is almost completely unsatisfying. Im not even sure what his point is. This is a little bit of a ramble; my apologies.
 
We (conscious humans) look at something and decide to interpret it as an information process; but such processes dont exist in the world and thus cant have causal powers.
 
I honestly dont even know what that means. Its hardly the knock-down argument I was waiting for. Reminds me of the kind of thing Thomas Aquinas might say  my apologies for such a shoddy kind of reply; its just I dont understand the statement well enough to make a rational reply to it.
 
We know that consciousness, whatever it is, exists, because we experience it. But we dont yet know what causes it. Were ruling out appeals to phenomenon that doesnt come down to physics.
 
Saying that humans do not consciously understand English is false more or less by definition  what else can we mean by consciousness?
 
There are only two ways out of it: you can either claim that no one is conscious or that everything is conscious
 
How does this follow? I cant say that certain kinds of arrangements of atoms, whose defining characteristics are as yet unknown, are conscious, and others arent?
 
Obviously consciousness is created by the brain (at least, thats what the behavior of other apparently conscious systems would indicate, when their brains are destroyed).  The only conceivable explanation, to me, is that consciousness is created by some process of computation, because there is nothing else there, that I know of, in our brains.
 
I have to agree with the guy who quoted Minsky. Something in the way our brains atoms are configured creates our experience, which we can only guess is something different from the experience of an insect or an ordinary computer program. If a chess playing program has state that registers that it is losing, is that the same as experiencing pain for a simple animal? For a human? If not, what is the difference? State that registers the state?
 
Basically I dont see the relation between these questions, which seem the pertinent ones to me, and what Aaron is talking about.
 
Thus, no computer can ever consciously understand Chinese, because no computer does more than what youre doing  its simply following a set of instructions.
 
The hardware is just following instructions. How do we know that computer hardware, plus a large pile of state, plus some transition rules, is not conscious? Isnt that pretty much what our brains are, as far as we know?
 
consciousness is a natural phenomenon which  is caused by the actions of the brain in the same way solidity is caused by the actions of atoms
 
How is this different from being caused by computation?
 
Heres awaiting your real post  in the mean time, unsubstantiated rambles are what you get back, from me at least :)
 
posted by David McCabe
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
Searles Chinese Room experiment is a trivial misdirection. He focuses on the man in the room matching symbols rather than the creator of the semantic and syntactic translation rules. That designer was conscious. The man in the room is working unconsciously. When I speak my mouth and vocal cords do the translation from nerve impulses to sound patterns but it is entirely unconscious. You have to follow the trail back into the brain where you get lost because consciousness is an emergent property of the neural networks, not a property of the machinery at all.
 
posted by James Vornov
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
Whats fascinating about the Chinese Room is that its a great litmus test.  People on both sides of the issue are absolutely clear on their position and think the people on the other side are being deliberately obtuse.
 
My own take on it: I admit Im deeply confused by why the information processes in my head would lead to my real subjective experience, but since I doubt that neurons have any essential properties that transistors lack, I have to conclude that software, in neuron or transistor form, can somehow lead to consciousness.  If theres some other process beyond that, adding qualia on top of the information processing, then I think that would have to be a property of the universe itself, not neurons as such.
 
What Ive always wanted to ask Searle is this: what exactly is it that you think neurons are doing, physically, that transistors cant do?  If I invented transistors that added that capability, could I build a consciousness out of them?
 
posted by Chris
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
Seth writes:
 
Its like saying an ice cube has some level of heat. So you react Thats crazy! An ice cube is cold, not hot!. Would it sound crazy to say (a similar but not identical idea) thermostats have some level of reaction to their environment?
 
Consciousness isnt defined as level of reaction to the environment. Consciousness is defined as subjective first-person experience. I dont think thermostats have subjective first-person experience. I do not think there is anything that it is like to be a thermostat.
 
Huh? Were assuming the theoretical possibility that building a computer program to solve the Turing Test is possible.
 
Thats right. ASSUMING! The point is that assumption itself is arguably circular or tautological.
 
I dont see the circularity. The argument is:
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
You got more comment from this one than any previous!!
 
Try one of Buckys faves: Korzybski. Science and Sanity was online, dunno if still there.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
Consciousness isnt defined as level of reaction to the environment. Consciousness is defined as subjective first-person experience.
 
Then thats using the large amount sense of the word. In that sense of the word - again, IN THAT SENSE OF THE WORD - I dont think anyone would be claiming thermostats have consciousness. They might say that using a different sense of the word, one akin (though not identical) to reaction to the environment.
 
I dont see the circularity. The argument is:
 
Cmon - youve debugged programs. You KNOW how complicated this is in practice.
What does follow it mean? It just may mean Create a process of such complexity that its a consciousnesses.
 
And this is where we start getting circular. All 1-3 basically say, is that if consciousness is an information process, then following an information process acts like consciousness. Thats circular. What 1-3 tries to do is say information processes are trivial things, by using trivializing language by assumption - i.e. write it down in a book IMPLIES, emotionally, trivial. Thats where the linguistic artifacts come in.
 
He doesnt. The program does. Another way of phrasing 1-4 is Assume we could build an artificial intelligence which passed the Turing Test in Chinese. Then a man could run that AI program and ask it something in Chinese, and it would answer in Chinese.. Which is rather tautological.
 
Only because you hid an assumption of that in the first place, by implicitly describing the AI above as not consciousness.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
Or in a more straightforward manner than Seth.
 
The Chinese Room assumes that the process of translating a language is an enumerable process, and hence describable in software on a Von-Neuman machine. Of course it isnt, so it cant be.
 
The reality of both human language comprehension and translation of such is far more complicated, and consciousness, which is a requirement for doing either or both activities in a recognizably human fashion, will therefore not be expressible in a Von-Neuman machine architecture.
 
Consciousness is not a counting problem, and can not be reduced to a counting problem. It is some other beast.
 
You can take an aspect of the thinking process and reduce it to a counting problem, but you can not combine some number, or even an infinite number, of counting problems to create human recognizable thinking.
 
posted by smacfarl
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
smacfarl:
 
Consciousness is not a counting problem, and can not be reduced to a counting problem.
 
You can use a counting, Von Neumann machine to represent floating point numbers to any precision you like, and use those to simulate a brain complete with juices in the grey matter and the firing of neurons (go down to the molecules if you like). Of course no actual man in a room could give you an answer in his lifetime but its just a thought experiment. If this system represents a Chinese speakers brain and its a faithful reproduction I see no reason why it wouldnt count as a consciousness. Dont be mislead by the fact that its life would run very slowly; it wont notice.
 
posted by Mind's I Reader
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
As far as I can tell, Aaron is saying that consciousness is a physical thing that happens in brains. Our experience of consciousness is a physical characteristic of what working brains do. Something like that. In which case, a computer program might be able to perfectly model it, but it would not actually be the thing itself. A computer could perfectly model a rock, and tell you everything about the rocks behavior, but that internal modelling would not be a rock.
 
Of course, it is possible that consciousness is a physical thing.
 
IMHO, However, whether it is true is not shown by the example of the Chinese room. It is also possible that the invisible dragon in my garage is a physical thing. Since we dont as have any way of detecting the difference between this type of consciousness and a simulated consciousness, its a lot like saying that consciousness is an invisible, undetectable, dragon in your head.
 
So, hopefully, Aaron can supply us with some reason that consciousness is a physical thing. Sorry if Im acting obtuse.
 
Also, the bulk of Searles description of consciousness as a natural phenomenon natural phenomenon which developed through evolutionary processes and is caused by the actions of the brain does not conflict at all with the functionalists Information Process idea of consciousness. The only part that conflicts is the idea that it is a physical thing.
 
Prove that, and you wont have to deal with this argument anymore.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
Aaron,
 
the neuroscience researchers, neurologists and psychiatrists define consciousness as level of response to the environment. Subjective self-awareness is a definition that enables circular arguments about consciousness. Its navel-gazing. If you want some mind-breaking logic, go do quantum physics or take a higher math class taught in the method of R. L. Moore. Im sure somebody at Stanford or MIT is teaching one.
 
The Summer of Code thing sounds fun and helpful,
 
Niels
 
posted by Niels
 on March 16, 2007 #
 
The blockhead argument seems very misleading to me.  Some reasons:
 
You cant build it in our universe, or in any universe remotely like ours.  (Even if the universe was big enough to contain the information required for blockhead, it wouldnt be able to access it quickly enough to carry on the conversation without transmitting information faster than the speed of light.)  This isnt a pedantic quibble - thought experiments are only useful when their premise cant be ruled out entirely.  Youre claiming that the turing test is bad because we can build this obviously unconscious system that could pass it - but we cant build it - not even close.
 
Even if it could exist, you immediately run into a problem with your definition of all possible conversations.  Which conversations are possible and which arent?  Are you restricting it to conversations that would not be implausible to have with a mentally sound person?  Or does it include all conversations that are grammatic, even if they are completely non-linear?  If you choose the latter, it probably wouldnt even seem conscious, if you choose the former, it is hard to see how you could build something like blockhead without creating an AI to build blockhead.  And that means that blockhead is just an expansion of all the possible ways that the state of that AI could evolve over the course of 30 minutes.  And here is where the slight-of-hand comes in: You know that people wont intuitively agree that the AI cant be conscious, since it is after all an AI.  So you try to trick them into calling an extremely inefficient representation of that AI unconscious, because its easy to say a big list isnt conscious as long as you dont stop and think about how big big is here.
 
Ignoring the above point, a list of all possible conversations is not sufficient.  Conversations involve choices made by both parties - for example if I ask blockhead what its favorite color is, it can say red or blue.  What part of blockhead makes that choice?
 
posted by 
 on March 16, 2007 #
 
I personally recommend Richard Rorty, who might show you that many of the words your have tried to throw around (e.g. ontology) are philosophical debris.
 
The whole consciousness debate is ridiculous.  No reasonable definition is being presented.  You seem to take pleasure in using it in awkward contexts to show how great your (ill-defined) argument is.  This technique of argument is frequently know as question begging.
 
As far as thinking about this problem in general though, I would recommend you abandon being a partisan in a tired debate and look at some current research in neuroscience.  fMRI has given us insight into the brain that simply wasnt possible when Dennett and Searle got started on this debate.  Heres one public exchange these two had twelve years ago:
 
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1680
 
I really recommend try some of Peter Dayans papers on for size.  Not the easiest stuff to get started on, but you get discussion of the brain based on solid research, not Chinese false dichotomy.
 
http://www.gatsby.ucl.ac.uk/~dayan/papers/index.html
 
Im not Dennetts biggest fan, but hes a clever guy who can be a pleasure to read.  You end your post looking like a glib Searle fanboy by charging that he is insane.  The Dennett you are refering to is what many in philosophy would call a straw man set up by Searle.
 
posted by Jeremy Corbett
 on March 16, 2007 #
 
Blockhead is interesting. Assume that the inquisitor gets the first move and makes a statement. Assume I am the inquisitor and my first statement is X. Presumably Blockhead does a lookup in its table of initial statements and gives the corresponding response Y (ignore the fact that even this hypothetical table of initial statements may have more entries than the number of protons in the universe). After the end of the conversation another inquisitor comes along and starts a conversation with statement X. Blockhead of course does not know whether this inquisitor is me again or someone else. Say it is me and I again start with statement X - blockhead will respond again with Y, whereas a conscious being might well come up with a different response, eg Hey, thats weird, someone just asked me that.
 
If blockhead is only judged on one single conversation it can be deterministic and will always respond in exactly the same way. A concious being would not do that. This perhaps indicates a weakness of the Turing test.
 
Imagine that Blockhead is going to be judged on multiple conversations, then I would say it could not pass itself off as conscious unless it keeps state from previous conversations. Imagine X is How many conversations have you had? If Y is
Ten then I could respond by saying But you said that last time I spoke to you, so it must be at least 11. So Blockhead would have to respond with something like What, you believe everything I say? or My memory is terrible. So Blockheads lookup tables must be designed to be consistent with a being that keeps no state information between conversations. I would hesitate to refer to any such hypothetical being as conscious.
 
posted by Ian Gregory
 on March 16, 2007 #
 
The trouble with the Chinese Room is that is postulates that the room is possible to construct and then draws conclusions from that assumption. Its as if I were to say Suppose I presented you with a pig that could speak Hungarian, would you say that the pig was conscious or not? My first reaction would be to say show me the pig. Somehow, people who would consider the idea of a Hungarian-speaking pig to be ludicrous are happy to accept the idea of a Chinese-speaking room.
 
Lets go with that assumption for a moment, though. Where did the data from the room come from? Well, of course it came from someone who could speak Chinese. Somehow we compiled details of all the knowledge of Chinese of that person into an instruction list for the room, in an analogy with a computer program.
 
Lets follow that analogy a bit. Instead of a compiled model, consider instead an interpreted model. In computer language terms these things are equivalent. Usually the only difference comes down to performance. Instead of pre-compiling the knowledge of the Chinese speaker, just put the speaker into the room and let him interpret the incoming messages and produce the output. Is there any doubt now where the consciousness of the room lies?
 
posted by Doug Clinton
 on March 16, 2007 #
 
Lets look at Blockhead, now. The definition says It simply contains a list of all possible thirty minute conversations.
 
What proceess could be used to compile such a list. I would assert that there are only two ways that such a list could be generated. The first is to have a person or a number of persons sit around and think up all the different conversations and record them. The second would be to have a computer generate all 30-minute combinations of words and then have one or more people filter out the ones which are meaningless.
 
Even if we assume that the set of conversations could practically be generated (i.e. not take longer than, say, the heat-death of the universe to compile), it is perfectly clear that the only way to generate the list for Blockhead to work on is to pass it through the mind of one or more conscious entities.
 
Neither this post or my earlier one on the Chinese room actually say anything about what consciousness is or might be. They simply point out that the postulates of both the Chinese Room and Blockhead are invalid, so any questions or conclusions that might arise from those problems are invalid.
 
posted by Doug Clinton
 on March 16, 2007 #
 
We dont consider the cellphone to be concious because we know that what appears to be one person talking to a box is actually there are two people having a conversation in real time through a box.
 
The instructions in the Chinese room are an asynchronous form of communication.  The outsider is having a conversation, asynchronously, with whoever wrote those instructions.  The person who wrote the instructions presubably understands Chinese.
 
The same is true of computer programs.  The user is having a delayed, anticipated conversation with the programmer.
 
You can play all sorts of tricks to make devices seem alive (Tickle-Me-Elmo), but if you consider these tricks to simply be asynchronous communication all the deep philosophical moments go away.
 
posted by Patrick May
 on March 20, 2007 #
 
the postulates of both the Chinese Room and Blockhead are invalid
 
Exactly.  If you can assume anything then you can prove anything.
 
posted by David S.
 on March 28, 2007 #
 
So, do you believe that the Church-Turing thesis is false, or that consciousness (whatever that may be) is not a computable function? Or some alternative that I have failed to list - as far as I can see those are the only possible conclusions to accepting the Chinese Room argument.
 
For the purposes of this question lets assume the quantum version of the Church-Turing thesis, though Im doubtful that quantum effects play a role in the brain (always felt rather dubious about Penroses arguments about that).
 
posted by Jack
 on April  6, 2007 #
 
Why do you need to bring aliens into the picture? For the subjective experience you refer to as seeing red, other humans cant experience it either. Imagine aliens that have the technology to take human eyes and incorporate them into their own anatomies. Does that give them the ability to have the same subjective experience as humans?
 
posted by EKoL
 on August  4, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 13, 2007
 
Title: Reagan, Star Wars, and the End of the Cold War
 

 
Its not hard to see why building technology to defend against nuclear missiles is tricky. First, theres the obvious difficulty of shooting at a moving target  like a bullet shooting a bullet. Then theres the fact that whatever device is defending you must itself be well defended, or else the enemy can simply take it out. And then theres the nasty fact that with nuclear war, near-perfect defense is necessary  even a single failure can cause enormous damage.
 
What is hard is explaining why, despite this, so many people took the idea so seriously. Thats the question Frances FitzGerald takes up in Way Out There In The Blue, in which she uses the Star Wars initiative as a prism with which to understand the Reagan administration. Combined with Rick Perlsteins forthcoming Nixonland, the books provide allegorical insight into our current government: Bush II has combined the criminality of Nixon with the intellectual emptiness of Reagan.
 
Ronald Reagan was an actor. Even when off the set, he recited polished lines and played up a well-practiced demeanor. Indeed, he appears to have no inner life whatsoever. No one can be found to whom Ronald Reagan ever opened up; even his wife commented that Theres a wall around him  even I feel that barrier. As president, he was given the equivalent of shooting instructions specifying exactly where he was supposed to be every hour of the day and when he attended public events toe marks were chalked on the ground to indicate where he should stand.
 
Considering the state of the American political system, having an actor for a President is perhaps not the worst idea. But what was problematic was that nobody  including Reagans closest aides  seemed to realize that that was what they were getting. For months they were continually shocked that Reagan refused to ever make a decision or take an action on any issue whatsoever. Instead, they watched dumbly as he simply listened to what he was told and nodded politely. When two of his subordinates disagreed, he was uncomfortable, but he steadfastly refused to intervene.
 
The result was that decisions ended up getting made by whoever was around  Nancy Reagan, his wife; Michael Deaver, his aide in charge of public relations; etc. Reagans top people, such as his cabinet officials, frightened that they were actually making policy without any supervision, kept this fact secret from their staffs and the public until they all published their kiss-and-tell memoirs after Reagan had left office. Even more shocking, Reagan didnt seem to mind when the members of this group changed. One day Reagans inner circle informed him that they were leaving and bringing the Treasury Secretary in to take their place. Reagan simply thanked them for their service.
 
There was one thing Reagan did seem to care about (aside from politely answering his fan mail): speeches. Reagan would rewrite his own speeches, removing abstract verbiage and adding homespun stories. And it was out of this concern that he stumbled into launching the Star Wars initiative.
 
After many years of right-wing propaganda about a window of vulnerability in our arms race with the Soviet Union, the Pentagon developed the MX missile series to ensure American superiority. The problem was where to put them. The MX missiles were designed to protect against the Soviets simply destroying all of our missiles, so they could not simply be put out in the open or the Soviets would simply destroy them as well. A variety of Rube Goldberg-like ideas were proposed to solve the problem.
 
After a thorough investigation, the military concluded the best solution was what came to be called the racetrack: the missiles would be put on huge underground circular tracks, with little launching stations cut sporadically in the track. There would be several times more launching stations than missiles, so the Soviets would not know which stations to attack. But, to verify compliance with arms treaties, the stations could be opened so that the Soviets could see which ones contained missiles from space.
 
The problem was that the racetracks would need to be huge and the only practical space for such a thing was in Utah. The Mormon Church was understandably unhappy about having a huge nuclear missile field being built near them and thus the powerful Republicans from that region of the country scuttled the plan.
 
Other ideas were tried  the racetrack was converted to a straight line system, then to a configuration known as Dense Pack in which the missiles were all placed close together, in the hopes that all the missiles coming to attack them would blow each other up and perhaps spare some of our missiles. Another plan, known as Big Bird, had the missiles flying overhead on large transport planes, but it was scrapped when technicians raised concerns about the wings falling off. Another proposal involved hiding the missiles as normal luggage on cross-country passenger trains. It got to the point where the best idea was literally known as DUMB  deep underground missile basing  in which the missiles would be loaded on corkscrews which would drill down underground. Finally, they decided just to deploy the missiles in superficially-hardened housing, even though this meant they could be easily destroyed.
 
At the same time, a mass popular movement for a nuclear freeze was growing, encompassing college students, churches, and many unpoliticized citizens. Reagans credibility on foreign policy was slipping away while books and movies and massive protests scared citizens into thinking about the unthinkable prospect of a nuclear holocaust. The Democrats were seizing power and mindshare and a nuclear freeze bill passed the House. Clearly something had to be done.
 
Missile defense seemed like the perfect alternative. It didnt require any diplomatic changes or sacrificing any weapons development  indeed, it allowed for more spending on research. But it allowed Reagan to use the language of the doves  a sincere desire to rid the world of the scourge of nuclear war. So when a Reagan aide proposed the idea (which the aide conceived of as a chip to be bargained away for with the Soviets), Reagan seized upon the idea and worked it into a speech at the next available opportunity.
 
There was just one problem: nobody had any idea how to make it work. The most prominent right-wing scientist, Edward Teller, was very excited about a new technology in which a high-powered X-ray could be sent along a rod to vaporize small objects. Teller proposed a large satellite with such rods sticking out of it, a device that came to be known as the space-based sea urchin. What happens when the Soviets target the defense? he was asked. Teller didnt seem to have considered the question but, unfazed, came back the next day suggesting the defense weapons be stored underwater and pop up when missiles were overhead.
 
Such debates disguised the fact that no actual missile defense technology existed or was likely to for a long, long time. Tactics and costs for disintegration rays and sea urchins could be discussed endlessly, but such discussion was irrelevant, as nobody knew how to build the key components. But this fact was carefully kept from politicians and the press who, ignorant of the science, continued to discuss missile defense as if it was a serious proposal. Thus, a majority of Americans were convinced that scientific ingenuity would find a way to protect the country  indeed, they believed it already had.
 
But the sheen of a someday-to-be-developed missile defense system could not last forever  Reagan needed something more repeatable to boost his flagging poll numbers, especially in the wake of such scandals as Iran-contra. The result was an ongoing series of carefully-spun summits with the Soviets, in which the President claimed to be making good progress on negotiations for arms reduction. (That negotiated arms reduction could serve as a replacement for a missile defense initiative never seemed to occur to the Reagan administration; it was not exactly a group prone to analytical self-reflection.)
 
On the Russian side, Mikhail Gorbachev, a brilliant and daring new politician, had come to power. Gorbachev seemed more like an American figure than a Russian one  he spoke plainly, made daring moves toward peace, and played well for the cameras. For much of the following years, Gorbachev had higher poll numbers in the US than Reagan did. Washington was said to have been swept away with Gorby fever and Gorbymania.
 
Gorbachev unilaterally made a series of striking reforms in both domestic and foreign policy. He offered the US a wide variety of concessions in disarmament talks, insisting only that the US stop the SDI program (the one principle which Reagan refused to concede). Then he begun the process of glasnost, increasing the freedom of the press and allowing a left-wing reform movement to develop. As part of this, he freed dissident physicist Andrei Sakharov, who proceeded to tell the media that SDI was a bluff that the US could never successfully develop. Shortly thereafter, Gorbachev was even willing to budge on that, allowing the US to continue SDI. Meanwhile, he begun the process of perestroika, reforming the Russian political and economic system to increase the scope of democracy.
 
Meanwhile, Reagans side continued to bungle or misunderstand all of Gorbachevs moves, using his disarmament proposals for little more than PR victories at home and continuing to insist his reforms were merely cosmetic attempts to prop up the old system. Reagan and Gorbachev continued to hold summits with plentiful photo opportunities, but little in the way of actual agreement was ever reached.
 
Indeed, Reagan actually made Gorbachevs reforms much more difficult by doing things like giving speeches demanding the General Secretary tear down this wall. Such speeches only lent credence to the conservatives who charged that Gorbachev was simply doing the Wests dirty work from the inside.
 
Yet despite Reagans ineptitude, Gorbachevs reforms took hold  perhaps even more strongly than he had intended  and the old Soviet system began to fall apart. Democratic parties were elected, troops were withdrawn, and the wall finally came down.
 
But Americans were reluctant to believe that the destruction of the Soviet system had come from the reformers within it. Instead, they retrospectively lionized Reagan as the man whose tough talk had made the system come apart.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 13, 2007
 
Its not hard to see why building technology to defend against nuclear missiles is tricky. First, theres the obvious difficulty of shooting at a moving target  like a bullet shooting a bullet. Then theres the fact that whatever device is defending you must itself be well defended, or else the enemy can simply take it out.
 
So clearly, air to air missiles are impossible.  We had best go back in time and stop people from building them successfully
 
posted by James Robertson
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
Russia has a deployed anti-missile system with launchers around Moscow and in Kazakhstan, with much the same capability and nobody seems to complain. Most discussions leave the impression the Russian system simply doesnt exist.
 
http://www.thespacereview.com/article/826/1
 
posted by Ron Bischof
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
James:
 
To be fair (and to the best of my knowledge), there has not been a successful test of a missile defense system taking down a missile with multiple warheads and realistic countermeasures.
 
Not surprising.  It is a difficult problem.  And the penalty for letting even one active warhead through is pretty effing staggering.
 
I would put it on the same order of magnitude of difficulty as mass consumer flying cars.  There is nothing theoretically impossible about mass consumer flying cars, but I dont expect a dealership to open near my house in four score years.
 
posted by manuelg
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
I have no idea what to think of Gorbachev.
 
As I see it, the main difference between Soviet Communism and the Communism practiced by China and Vietnam is that the Soviets believed in a global revolution and believed they could jump from a third world state to first world in one generation.
 
China and Vietnam seem to have no pretensions of a global revolution, and seem to see communism as the quickest way to move from third world to first world, but being realistic about its speed.
 
Practicality triumphs.
 
I dont see that Gorbachev had much choice.  Controlling the Soviet satellite states consumed resources Russia could not afford, easing back control was tried, but ethnic loyalties exploded free the very first moment restraining force was slightly eased.
 
posted by manuelg
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
[I remember his orbituary in SF Chron (2003, Sept 10th) - I can recall how I read it, while I was also reading about Szilard and other Hungarian Jews. It was a puzzling read and its stuck in the corner of my memory.]
 
I dont know how to put link (url string is too long), so just some lines.  The whole article is available from SF Chronicles archive.]
 
His staunch support for a strong national defense was forged as a boy during the 1919 Communist revolution in his native Hungary and was strengthened as a young man studying in Germany as Hitler and the Nazi Party rose to power. Even the end of the Cold War and the fall of the Soviet Union were not enough to shake his unwavering support for a powerful defense.
 
The danger for ballistic missiles in the hands of 18 different nations has increased, and will increase, unless we have a defense, he once said. If we want to have stable, peaceful conditions, defense against sudden attack by rockets is more needed than ever.
 
Teller was born Jan. 15, 1908, in Budapest. He was raised in a comfortable middle-class home surrounded by music, art, poetry and literature, but he and his family also felt the sting of anti-Semitism.
 
He witnessed the rise of Hitler and Nazism in Germany during the 1920s and 1930s, and he fled to London four years after earning his doctorate in physics under Werner Heisenberg at the University of Leipzig in 1930.
 
He spent just one year lecturing at the University of London before he and his wife, Mici, immigrated to the United States in 1935 so he could teach at George Washington University. They became American citizens in 1941.
 
During many years as a professor at UC Berkeley, however, Teller  regardless of his political beliefs  earned widespread praise among undergraduates for his skill, his charm and his clarity in teaching Physics 10, the elementary physics course designed for liberal arts students with no strong interest in science.
 
In his personal life, Teller possessed a typical Hungarian charm  he met visitors with grace, played the piano with great skill for reporters who interviewed him and maintained a wide circle of friends  as well as opponents  both at Berkeley and at Stanford.
 
posted by Re: Edward Teller 1908-2003
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
Its slightly misleading to state that the world discovered that missile defense wouldnt work until Sakharov started talking about it. Groups such as the American Physical Society published a number large of reports on the feasibility of star wars that were politically quite influential. The APS reports stated that star wars were unlikely to work.
 
You can read a bit about the report at
 
http://sciencereview.berkeley.edu/articles.php?issue=9&article=missile-defense
 
posted by Paul Guinnessy
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
Its slightly misleading to state that the world discovered that missile defense wouldnt work until Sakharov started talking about it.
 
I didnt say that, nor does FitzGerald. What I said was that Sakharov told the media that SDI was a bluff. FitzGerald argues that there was something about Sakharovs stature that allowed the government to realize that this was really true when he said it, even though others had said it many times before.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
But Americans were reluctant to believe that the destruction of the Soviet system had come from the reformers within it. Instead, they retrospectively lionized Reagan as the man whose tough talk had made the system come apart.
 
I had always heard it chalked up to the failure of centralized economy leading to collapse of power  if were talking about popular explanations.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on March 15, 2007 #
 
Growing up in Australia I always admired Gorbachev and considered Reagan a hollow man. Moving to the USA and learning that Reagan was a revered figure here, credited with ending the Cold War, was baffling.
 
posted by Yatima
 on March 16, 2007 #
 
the destruction of the Soviet system had come from the reformers within it
 
Your analysis of Gorbachevs role in the dissolution of the Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc is not correct.   The reforms (and the choice of Gorbachev as General Secretary) were an attempt to prevent the complete economic and ideological collapse of the Soviet sytem.   When public reaction to the reforms spiraled out of control, Gorbachev made the commendable decision not to use force (except for the tragic example of Lithuania) to reassert Soviet authority.     The destruction of the Soviet system came from its complete bankruptcy (in all senses of the word); Gorbachevs contribution was allowing it to happen with a minimum of violence.
 
posted by Maciej Ceglowski
 on March 19, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 13, 2007
 
Title: Why You Shop At Wal-Mart: Economics Eats Itself
 

 
There is a theory (quite an elegant one, actually) that says that because we live in a marketplace of free choices we end up getting basically what we want  our dollars are like votes for the society we wish to live in. Many have challenged this view, from a variety of perspectives, but Tom Slee (who calls this notion MarketThink) has chosen to focus on just one: the economic subfield of game theory.
 
In his elegant little book, the poorly-titled No One Makes You Shop At Wal-Mart, Slee walks through the major discoveries of game theory, explains them in simple language with reference to a fictional town of Whimsley, and discusses how they refute standard economic conclusions while still playing by basic economic assumptions with effects that appear to show up in the real world.
 
Take the problem of littering, for example. The town of Whimsley has a large park between its coffee shop and its office building. Residents can toss their empty coffee cups on the ground in the park, thereby saving themselves the trouble of carrying it but minutely spoiling the park, or they can carry it to the trash at the office, saving the park but bothering their hands. In the absence of anyone else, each resident is better off tossing their cup  the bother of carrying it is much more than the small amount of spoilage. But if everyone does this, the park is quickly full of litter. Each individual, acting perfectly rationally, creates a situation that none of them want.
 
A similar problem gives the book its title. Imagine you get some utility from having a vibrant downtown of independent shops. Then a Wal-Mart opens up on the outskirts of town. You begin shopping at the Wal-Mart because the prices are cheaper and you can still walk through the vibrant downtown when you like. But with everyone buying things at Wal-Mart, the downtown stores can no longer afford to stay open and the center of your city turns into an empty husk. Youd prefer to have the vibrant downtown to the Wal-Mart, but nobody ever gave you that choice.
 
The book is full of dozens of examples like this, each with careful analysis and clear writing. Perhaps the most odd feature of the book is its politics. On the one hand, Slee is plainly a committed leftist, with positive references to Naomi Klein and other capitalist critics. But on the other hand, he never gives up on the rational actor and methodological individualist assumptions of modern economics, and shows little patience for those (typically his political allies) who have more thorough-going critiques. Nonetheless, the book is a recommended read for anyone interested in these questions.
 
Online Bonus: Watch Tom Slee eviscerate Chris Andersons inbox-stuffer, The Long Tail on his weblog, Whimsley. Because, remember folks, Abundance, like growth itself, is a force that is changing our world in ways that we experience every day, whether we have an equation to describe it or not. (p. 146)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 13, 2007
 
Interesting that critics of neoclassical economics have almost caught up to what Ronald Coase said in 1937. The park example is the classic Assume nobody owns a given piece of property. Now, nobody treats it as though they own it. Clearly, ownership is the problem, which is a bit like criticizing modern medicine on the grounds that if you dont give anyone flu shots, lots of people will die from the flu.
 
The solution is to either make the park someones property, or set up your laws such that it acts as if it is someones property. That may not be the kind of world you want to live in, but its a world immune to Slees facile criticism.
 
posted by Byrne Hobart
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
Its not clear to me how to turn air into property in order to stop air pollution, but Ive added another example thats more directly market-based.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
Air-as-property is one of the few markets for which a government (or multi-government) initiative is clearly and intuitively the best solution: emissions credits distributed on a per-capita basis would pretty quickly ensure that the only firms that polluted were the ones that created net wealth by doing so.
 
As far as the Wal Mart example is concerned, its rather hard for me to take seriously. Homogeneity is a characteristic that one entity has relative to another  in an increasingly Wal Marted world, the funky and original shops are proportionately more interesting. I used to live in a city just barely big enough for a chain bookstore, and at the time I thought Barnes & Noble was fabulous. Now I live in a city with a dozen or so B&Ns, including their flagship store  so I prefer cozier shops like Strand and Shakespeare & Co..
 
Id rather live in a city with cheap commodities and interesting alternatives than in a place where the alternatives had a monopoly.
 
posted by Byrne Hobart
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
Per-capita emissions credits are a government-instituted form of regulation. Sure, they happen to work by distributing a new form of property, but they still require government action to get around a collective action problem created by the markets lack of concern for externalities.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
Almost. They arent a new form of property  theyre legal recognition of existing property. Clean air exists, and is enjoyed or exploited regardless of law. If our laws recognize that its a valuable resource, economic entities will treat it as such.
 
The market lacks concern for externalities if and only if you define it solely in terms of the two sides to any one transaction. Given that for any transaction, the vast majority of people are neither the party nor the counterparty, this is a limited definition  Id say that the market is the sum of all transactions, and that in this case externalities are side effects that arent sever enough per participant to warrant negotiation.
 
posted by Byrne Hobart
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
A big part of the lesson of WalMart is that the commodities arent actually as cheap as they seem: many of the costs that WalMart avoids still must be paid by someone, and often local and state governments are the ones who pay, through channels like increased stress on emergency rooms for WalMart employees with no insurance.
 
I think if WalMart was actually held to the federal laws which are supposed to regulate it: laws on labor organizing, employee compensation, environmental factors, etc., there would be considerably less pressure on smaller local businesses.
 
I can only speculate what the American economy and US cities would look like if public policy advanced the interests of small businesses, consumers, workers, and the community at large, instead of being so skewed towards huge corporate entities.  But to say these phenomena are purely the creation of the market, and government non-interference, etc. is to ignore quite a bit, IMO.  Of course, in many ways, the success of businesses like WalMart has to do with meeting real needs: Big chain stores bring new goods that were previously impossible to find, and commoditize many others to the point that more can afford them.  But that isnt the whole story by a wide margin.
 
It surprises me that there isnt more public discourse in America about these issues, because in Europe, for instance, local and regional products are heavily protected, advertising is deeply limited (roads arent plastered with billboards, television isnt blanked by pharmaceutical ads, etc.), and labor and consumer groups have immense government influence.  Its an open question whether one or the other system is more desirable, but at least I would expect vigorous public debate on these issues, instead of a unitary focus on cultural issues like gay marriage.
 
In other words, that WalMart wins and local businesses and products lose is in large part in the hands of public policy, and is directly due to the current political conventional wisdom about markets and their role.
 
Almost. They arent a new form of property  theyre legal recognition of existing property. Clean air exists, and is enjoyed or exploited regardless of law. If our laws recognize that its a valuable resource, economic entities will treat it as such.
 
This is absurd.  Clean air is not property, and to force it into such a framework is at best a way of hacking existing market-based mechanisms to deal with problems they arent really suited to.  Pretending that this is the natural order is just buying into a deeply limited conceptual framework which has little to do with the actual problems faced by government.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
To add to the end of second section above.  The focus of our political system is on cultural issues, (or problems so big they cannot be ignored, like the blatant political corruption and abysmal foreign-policy failures of the current republicans), but the assumptions about economics and policy that make up the conventional wisdom are very seldom discussed in political debate, or at least not directly.  While particular policies are open to debate, there is little discussion of the need for the government to spend trillions of dollars on new weapons, the need to allow healthcare or media to be privatized and run principally for profits, the need for food companies to market directly to children, for drug manufacturers to market directly to consumers, or for need to subsidize coal and nuclear power.
 
These are taken as (more or less) fundamental truths in the current political climate, and this is deeply worrying to me.  Hopefully the Democratic party can begin to question at least some of these assumptions.  Im not very hopeful, however.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
Substitute Perhaps for Hopefully in the second-to-last sentence there. :)
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
Im going to bn.com to add the damn book to my Barnes and Noble wishlist, because goddammit I am not going to shop at Amazon.
 
(Yes, I realize I am the last person on earth who cares.)
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
The basic premise here seems to be one playfully described by Garrett Hardin as CCPP  commonize the costs and privatize the profits and I was delighted to find a bit of his writings on the subject available here.
 
Hardin is best known for The Tragedy of the Commons which ought to have been called the Tragedy of the Mismanaged Commons, because there is nothing inherently wrong with a commons. Just that the mechanisms for controlling how individuals (and individual corporations) make use of them have more or less completely broken down.
 
I happen to think Hardin was one of the worlds great original thinkers who, alas, continues to be ignored.
 
posted by Jeremy Cherfas
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
Then a Wal-Mart opens up on the outskirts of town. You begin shopping at the Wal-Mart 
 
Even if you dont shop there, the result is likely the same.
 
A persons economic decisions are like one vote in the marketplace.
 
posted by Joe Grossberg
 on March 13, 2007 #
 
Byrne - You seem to be taking Aarons generous review as an exhaustive description of my book. Im not the right person to judge whether the book is facile or not, but I do get a little bit beyond the point you are making. There are externalities beyond collective-action dilemmas.
 
I think Jacob Ruuss sentence captures my own point of view well: Clean air is not property, and to force it into such a framework is at best a way of hacking existing market-based mechanisms to deal with problems they arent really suited to. - as market logic extends further and further away from the trading of commodities, its tendency to treat externalities as an afterthought becomes more problematic.
 
Chapter one, by the way, is online at http://www.tomslee.net/excerpt.html.
 
posted by tom s.
 on March 14, 2007 #
 
Youd prefer to have the vibrant downtown to the Wal-Mart
 
Well, I think thats a case of inappropriate bundling.  It isnt that the you in this case prefers the vibrant downtown to the Wal-Mart, because thats clearly contradicted by his actions  if, overall, he preferred the vibrant downtown, hed have continued shopping there even though it was more expensive.  People do shop at more expensive stores when they prefer them, so theres nothing particularly weird about that.
 
But the hypothetical person here would still claim to prefer the vibrant downtown if you asked him on his way to pick up jeans at Wal-Mart.  The problem is that there are two separate preferences here: he prefers to relax and enjoy the vibrant downtown as a place to hang out, but prefers to pay for actual goods at the Wal-Mart rate.  Bundling these separate preferences into a single question obfuscates whats really going on enough that entire books can (and have) been written about it (before this one, I mean, if thats mostly what its about).
 
posted by Randall Randall
 on March 18, 2007 #
 
Randall, yes. But I think he was saying that theres an ordering over the states of the world (Walmart + Downtown) > (Downtown no Walmart) > (Walmart destroys Downtown). Theres nothing really bizarre or unreasonable about that.
 
However, what I dont understand is why we should be upset by this situation. Saying that you yourself want to shop at Walmart while still having a downtown to enjoy is basically saying that youd like someone else, whether it be the proprietors or other customers, to subsidize downtown. But of course youd like that; it doesnt particularly trouble me that you cant.
 
On the other hand, Im not sure how much of the destruction of these downtowns is really inevitable. It seems to me that while Walmart does provide lots of low-cost goods, theres all sorts of other things that they cannot (or at least probably wont) provide. Given the desire people have for vibrant downtowns, it would seem that creative businesspeople and entrepreneurs could find something to fill that void, coffeeshops, restaurants, gyms, or I dont even know what. Perhaps small-time stores tend to be complacent and reliant on a captive audience for their wares, and maybe that sort of situation is going away due to technology and other factors.
 
posted by  
 on March 19, 2007 #
 
The proprietor may well cut this post, and I wouldnt blame him. But just to respond to Randall and the following post, here is the Wal-Mart vs. downtown section. It is in Chapter 1, and is not intended to be a detailed or exhaustive analysis - so please dont take it as such.
 
Jack lives in Whimsley. Some time ago Jack used to do most of his shopping in the downtown areaof course, he no longer doesand he also used to walk through the downtown before crossing Whimsley Park on his way to work.
 
Jack shares an eccentric trait with the other inhabitants of Whimsley: he has an odd way of making choices. As he goes about his daily life, when faced with a decision he assigns numerical points to the benefits and costs of the available options, and he chooses the option that gives the most points.
 
Lets follow Jacks reasoning as he thinks about what life was like when he shopped in the downtown area.
 
Value. I did much of my shopping at the two downtown department stores. They provided reasonable selection and price. They were worth two satisfaction points per week.
 
Variety. I liked the variety of the two stores. Sometimes I went to one store, sometimes the other, depending on what I needed, how much time I had, what other errands I had, and so on. The variety of having two stores was worth an additional two points.
 
Atmosphere. I assigned myself another two points each week from my enjoyment of the thriving downtown as I walked through it on the way to work.
 
Jack was happy to the tune of six points per week: two for selection and price, two for the variety of shopping options he had available, and two for the atmosphere of the thriving downtown.
 
A few years ago Wal-Mart opened a new store on the outer edge of Whimsley. Wal-Mart has huge economies of scale and tremendous bargaining power with its suppliers, and thus is able to offer the lowest prices. Like any consumer, Jack likes low prices. So Jack started shopping mainly at Wal-Mart.
 
For a while things were pretty good. Jack was happier because of Wal-Marts arrival in town. Here is his reasoning.
 
Value. By shopping mainly at Wal-Mart I not only continue to have a reasonable selection but I also get lower prices. So I give myself three points per week for price and selection, instead of the two I used to get by shopping at the downtown stores.
 
Variety. Whats more, Wal-Mart has extended my range of options: I assign myself an additional satisfaction point for the extra variety that Wal-Mart introduces, because on the days I dont feel like trekking out to Wal-Mart I can still visit one of the other stores and get what I need.
 
Atmosphere. There is no change to the atmosphere of the city, so I still get my two points for atmosphere.
 
Soon after Wal-Mart arrived, then, Jack was getting eight points per week: three from Wal-Marts selection and everyday low prices, three from the expanded variety he has available, and, as before, two from walking through the lively downtown to work. Jack was happier than before Wal-Mart built its store.
 
Of course, Jack was not the only person in Whimsley to be making choices, and that is where his problems started. Like him, many other people started to shop at Wal-Mart. The smaller department stores downtown started to have troubles, and gradually they went out of business.
 
Wal-Mart became the only department store in Whimsley. Jack had to shop at Wal-Mart all the time, like it or not. As a result, Jacks points for variety moved down to just a single point. Jack wanted more variety, but instead he got less. With the closing of the downtown department stores, Jack was down to six points per week again. He was as happy as before Wal-Mart came, but no happier. Thats not too bad. At least Jack was no worse off than he was before.
 
But Jacks problems did not stop there. Once the downtown department stores closed, the slower customer traffic in the area meant that other stores closed too. Now downtown is not so interesting anymore: a number of shops are boarded up, others have been replaced by dollar stores, and the buildings are shoddy. Jack does not enjoy walking past the rundown area on the way to work. It gives him no pleasure. No points.
 
Now Jack has only four points per week. He is less happy than he was before Wal-Mart came.
 
In the beginning Jack made a choice that he believed would make him happier, but now he finds that he is less happy.
 
posted by tom s.
 on March 19, 2007 #
 
The solution is to either make the park someones property, or set up your laws such that it acts as if it is someones property.
 
I have an example why this doesnt work in practice. I live by a city that burned to the ground in 1903 and was rebuilt in a peculiar architectural style called Art Noveau. The buildings are not the most glorious examples of Art Noveau (funds were limited), nor is it the place with most art noveau buildings (because it is a pretty small town), but the concentration is what makes the town unique.
 
Do you get my meaning? What is valuable is not any individual house, no matter how glorious, but the fact that there are so many of them in close proximity. Now how do we go about protecting this thing? I assert that it has great value for the local tourism business, and its probably worth a smaller amount to each of the citys inhabitants, but how can we protect our interests? Who shall own that which makes the houses greater than its part?
 
Its not a rhetorical question. The Art Noveau houses are being torn down at an alarming rate, because to each individual owner, that is a sensible ecenomic decision. Only a few particularly pretty building are protected by law, but thats not where the value of the city lies.
 
posted by Harald Korneliussen
 on March 26, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: March 11, 2007
 
Title: Ode to a Blue Bicycle
 
For the longest time, I treated my bicycle as an extension of myself. I would strap on my helmet and jacket, fit myself into the seat, and firmly attach my arms to the handle bars and go. From then on, I saw myself as the bicycle. When I wanted to turn left, Id rotate my arms left and wed all move left. I didnt think of it as having the bike move left and staying on the bike  I thought of it as moving left. The bike was a part of me.
 
Its the same way I think of a car. You buckle into your seatbelt and suddenly you grow to become this huge hunk of metal that tears down the road. Moving left or right is now done through the steering wheel, but it still seems like youre the one whos doing the moving.
 
Body parts act kind of like our agents. When I want to raise my hand, I simply think to do so and my hand flies up. I let the rest of my body worry about the details. Similarly, when I want my bike to turn left I simply rotate the handle and let it use its momentum to wheel me over.
 
But heres the thing. I recently bought a nice, new, blue bike. And something strange happened. I stopped seeing it as an extension of my body, and started seeing it as just another tool. And suddenly riding it became a lot more fun.
 
I didnt have to stay attached to the bike all the time. I could keep one foot on a pedal and swing the other one over. Or I could go left while the bike went right, the two of us swinging back and forth in a counterweight dance. Or I could let the bike go ahead of me or behind me.
 
It seems counterintuitive that youd get more out of a bike when you started treating it as a tool. People speak in glowing terms of how their cars act as extensions of their body, a perfect meld between mind and machine. And maybe that makes sense for cars (theyre big and confusing enough that theres not much else you can do). But I think this is another case of the genius being in the details. Once I saw the bike as a bike, I could use it in ways that werent particularly intended.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
March 11, 2007
 
The extension of your body effect is really strong, and its not only control but in reception. I once cut too close to some pedestrians in Boston, and one of them slapped my car. It was as shocking as if theyd hit me personally. Its not just me, I later similarly slapped a car that drove past me over a crosswalk one night, and the driver got out and swung at me (I got away unhit). But the identity with the vehicle goes quite far.
 
posted by Car Slapper
 on March 11, 2007 #
 
Remind me not to walk around in Boston.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on March 12, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February 18, 2007
 
Title: Classism at Google
 
From the comments:
 
MOST PEOPLE who work at Google are in SUPPORT roles!! And they are getting paid way less than industry standard for working 50, 60+ hours a week for it! Screw the free food, screw the laundry - the MAJORITY of people working at Google are in buildings without any of these amenities, and are certainly without extra money from stock options.
 
[] they are the ones working their asses off, in overtime, but that doesnt matter because they are salaried but way below industry standards for support positions, to make sure that YOU, the user, has an accessible Help Center, has a kind, email response, has an answer to your question.
 
Yes, there are foosball tables in the support buildings, but who has time to play them? Giant overhead projectors alerting them to the current turnaround time for their emails is Big Brother enough to ensure that they dont even THINK about playing foosball when they should be answering support emails. Breakfast, lunch, and dinner are not nice alternatives - they are NECESSARY to ensure that all of the support peons remain dutiful and consistent with their email turnaround times.
 
Wow, sounds like theyre overworked. Cant Google just hire more people? HAHAHAHAHAHA!!!!! For a response to that, please see the above comments. Its as hard to get a support role here if youre an MBA with a PhD as a hobby, as if you invented nuclear physics.
 
Ive been here almost 5 years, and as soon as my refresher grant has vested, I am out like Lance Bass. Its a load of corporate baloney - the 400-person company that I started at has become a nightmare that has eaten my soul. God help the users.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 18, 2007
 
Wait a minute - Im not one to employ the standard libertarian defense lightly, but cmon!  If these people are being payed below industry standard wages, why dont they get a job somewhere else?  You know, at those places that are above the industry average.  Or is every company below average?  What is keeping them at this horrible company that treats them so poorly?
 
Oh right, I forgot, Google is keeping them there against their will by turning them into infants.  How clever!
 
posted by Mark
 on February 19, 2007 #
 
Dont doubt the power of golden handcuffs.
 
A lot of folks continue to put up with crappy jobs or crappy employers for a number of reasons. I was lucky to get a job here. I cant get a job anywhere else doing this, If I give up, Ill be a failure. It cant be as bad as I think, or my personal favorite When my stock vests, Ill be rich.
 
All of those are actually false, of course, but theyre just as effective as the proverbial gun to the head.
 
posted by jr
 on February 19, 2007 #
 
Your About page says fundamentally this blog is not for you, its for me.  What does this post do for you?
 
I ask because I agree with several comments on this blog, including in the thread you linked to, which claim that youve become concerned more with feeling that you understand something, rather than with truth itself; that when you come across ideas that appeal to you, you think Aha!  This is good, and subconsciously add the doubts and demands of profound investigation be damned.
 
Theres no reason for you to care about these comments, especially this one, which is anonymous.
 
Still, this blog is for you, to help shape yourself as an intellectual craftsman.
 
A craftsman would, before posting, do the following: verify (or falsify) the claim that the majority of Googles employees, or at least those in support roles, receive substandard compensation; and document the process through which it was verified (or falsified).  A true craftsman would never be satisfied posting without at least that effort.
 
Verifying jrs comment would require a more significant amount of work: you would need to conduct a representative series of interviews with underpaid employees at Google, in order to understand the reasons for which they dont offer their resignation.
 
Its too late to do this work before you post, but do it for yourself, anyway.
 
posted by umi
 on February 20, 2007 #
 
The comment I posted above is not meant as a lecture, and I probably should just have emailed it to you.  At any rate, I think it matters.
 
posted by umi
 on February 20, 2007 #
 
support people dont get stock options, but the OP is only hanging on until his vest hmm
 
support is a garbage job no matter where you work. at least google has free food. let the world know when you find the high-prestige, six figure help desk job of your dreams.
 
unfortunately, I now know at least half of those support people who work at google. where else would all those stanford graduates in linguistics/symbolic systems/cognitive science get jobs if google didnt exist?
 
posted by stark fist of reality
 on February 21, 2007 #
 
Most of corporate America (and the rest of the world too) is just a giant pyramid scheme, keeping the people at the top wealthy.
 
(with the freedom to start your own pyramid, of course)
 
Does anyone know how Googles non-US offices work?  I suspect the extent of employee perk generosity  ends at the border.  I dont think anyone gets free meals at the Japanese office. (maybe free drinks, yay)
 
posted by Noraneko
 on February 21, 2007 #
 
Seriously, what is your beef with Google? Several posts dedicated to complaining about the state of affairs at this company.
 
Additionally, any time you are confronted with criticism about your stance you seem to jump up on a high horse with comments such as They offered me a job every time I visited their campus or They want to buy my company and the like.
 
Relax man. Worry about your own company instead of theirs.
 
posted by Anonymous Coward
 on February 27, 2007 #
 
Hey aaron,
 
Im getting an internal server error message whenever I try to go to any reddit domain? Whats going on?
 
Reddit down? Could you post some updates for us as you guys are doing stuff.
 
posted by smacfarl
 on March  1, 2007 #
 
Mark: Employers are monopsonists.
 
umi: I think youre confusing me with Paul Graham. What part of fringe-thoughts: various ideas which may be byproducts of everyday life, snatches of conversation overheard in the street, or, for that matter, dreams [] may lead to more systematic thinking did you not understand? What kind of person starts a research project before jotting a snatch of conversation they overheard?
 
Anonymous Coward: Only several posts? Google is one of the biggest local companies; a lot of my friends work there and many of the rest work in its shadow. I dont think its unreasonable for me to think about that a bit.
 
I dont jump on a high horse every time someone criticizes my stance  Ive responded to a specific (but sadly common) ad hominem attack by pointing out that it was false. Perhaps I should have just pointed out it was ad hominem and kept my mouth shut, but since it was so popular I thought that pointing out it was false would probably be more effective. But apparently correcting peoples is now seen as getting emotionally agitated.
 
I dont know what there is to relax about; I dont even have a company.
 
smacfarl: I dont work for reddit.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on March  1, 2007 #
 
umi: I think youre confusing me with Paul Graham. What part of fringe-thoughts: various ideas which may be byproducts of everyday life, snatches of conversation overheard in the street, or, for that matter, dreams [] may lead to more systematic thinking did you not understand? What kind of person starts a research project before jotting a snatch of conversation they overheard?
 
I suppose the kind of person who cares about the spirit of that quote.  As well as the kind who believes honesty requires him to acknowledge the difference between a public indictment of another party, and a private record of thought.
 
However, I didnt post in order to get a response from you.  I said I think it matters.  I cant make it matter to you.
 
For what its worth, I found many of Grahams essays fairly glib and intellectually lazy.  I think he writes well but is, like you, happy to think until he comes to a conclusion that he likes, and from then on stop probing it too much.
 
posted by umi
 on March  1, 2007 #
 
Are you ever wrong? or has anything posted in the comments to your blog ever caused you to reconsider a position?
 
I wouldnt mind if every one of your posts was about google, but google is only about the fiftieth largest private employer in the bay area (many of which are tech companies). That is what I believe the other commenters are responding to, i.e. why all the hit pieces on google, why not on Apple, Cisco, HP, Oracle, Intel, Sun, etc? Are you implicitly indicating that you believe that working at any of the previous six companies would be better than working at google?
 
posted by chaz22
 on March  1, 2007 #
 
With all due respect, Googles support leaves much to be desired.
 
posted by Robert Lai
 on March 11, 2007 #
 
What in essence is being said is that, extremely  qualified, heavily screened support professionals are currently willing to work extremely hard for relatively lower pay by  just to be a part of Google.  While the anemities are just to make them less likely to leave the building.
 
And that Google does not see fit to hire other qualified support professionals because their standards are much too high - and would rather overwork their current staff at lower than industry standard pay as long as they are willing to put up with the situation.
 
And in essence, no one has complained to Google, and revealing blog posts are very very rare.
 
posted by Search Engines WEB
 on March 11, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February 17, 2007
 
Title: Bandwagon
 

 
A new service called Bandwagon is launching soon that automatically backs up the music libraries of iTunes users to Amazon S3 for a flat rate. It looks very cleanly-designed; if only they did it for your whole hard drive.
 
Disclosure: By posting this blog post, theyre giving me a free one-year account.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 17, 2007
 
Too bad their logo looks like a penis.
 
posted by Billy
 on February 17, 2007 #
 
Nice score, Aaron.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on February 18, 2007 #
 
I like this blog a lot more when you stay out of the business of advertising in the sites core content.
 
posted by mako
 on February 19, 2007 #
 
I assume you got the e-mail this afternoon with the freebie code? Have you, can you, look under the hood at their code? Would greatly appreciate your assessment in the coming weeks.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on February 23, 2007 #
 
Its closed source but it actually seems quite nice and the people behind it have been doing a great job revving it.
 
I was going to remove this post from the front page after I got the code, but this post got more attention than a usual post of mine and Im actually pretty impressed with the software.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on February 23, 2007 #
 
Aaron:
 
I read your blog with great interest. Sadly your objectivity has take a great hit in my eyes. Here is quote from David Pogue about a blogger taking something free:
 
Being provided an evaluation computer from Acer is not a bribe, argued blogger Blake Handler, after receiving one of the free laptops. It simply allows me to accelerate my evaluations, documentation and demonstrations of Windows Vista.
 
OMG! Youve got to be kidding me, Blake. I guess just being lent a laptop wouldnt have been enough to accelerate your evaluations? I guess only being given a freebie from Microsoft would do the trick.
 
Now, I realize it must be hard to send a shiny new laptop back to the mother ship just because its the right thing to do. Still, I think very little of the bloggers who are keeping Microsofts bribe laptops.
 
Clearly, theyre exploiting the lawless, Brave New World of the blogsophere, where, since theyre Not Quite Journalists, they dont feel constrained by any of those pesky journalistic ethics guidelines. Like the one that says, You dont keep $2,200 gifts from the subject of your review. You might think you can still write an impartial review, but its highly unlikely-and either way, nobody will believe it.
 
All people make mistakes. I hope that you learn from this one.
 
posted by T.
 on February 25, 2007 #
 
Jungle Disk is a pretty good general backup solution based on Amazon S3 (Im using the free beta, but I am receiving no goodies in exchange).
 
posted by mtraven
 on March  6, 2007 #
 
The explanation is so terse I think this is an experiment on Aarons part to see what people will say about this.  I dont think hes getting anything for free.  Hes something of a rich man these days so he wouldnt be much tempted by this kind of offer anyway.
 
posted by Ethan
 on March  7, 2007 #
 
Aaron, you might be interested
 
http://onlyubuntu.blogspot.com/2007/03/backup-and-restore-ubuntu-system-using.html
 
posted by Terence Pua
 on March 22, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February 16, 2007
 
Title: God Is My Dungeonmaster
 

 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 16, 2007
 
mine 2 lololol
 
posted by geek4god
 on February 16, 2007 #
 
This would go well with the shirt based off the slogan Jesus Saves! The rest of you take full damage. (http://www.cafepress.com/ariesdiscord)
 
posted by culix
 on February 23, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February 14, 2007
 
Title: Average People
 
College towns are funny. Im sitting in a small cafe, reading my little book, eating my little breakfast. Im the only customer around and the employees seem to have forgotten theres even me, so they start gabbing to themselves. The Mexican immigrant chef is chatting to the high school dropout waitress. Pause here and ask yourself what these two people might talk to each other about in their spare time. Try and think about what you might talk to them about were you in such a situation. Now recall that youre in Cambridge, Massachusetts. They were talking, quite animatedly, about the demographic trends for marriage under European-style social democracy.
 
They quickly shut up when a girl walked in. The usual? asked the girl behind the counter. Yep, said the girl coming in the door. The order was prepared and delivered while the two girls chatted politely. Then the girl took her food and left. God, I hate her, said the girl behind the counter. I dont understand how an idiot like that goes to Tufts. She doesnt care anything about ideas.
 
College towns are funny.
 
Recently, Seth Roberts and I have embarked on an odd little project. Weve gone to various colleges in the area and asked kids why theyre there. The first day was at Berkeley and as I walked through Sproul Plaza at noon, kids of every shape and description trying to push fliers and come-ons in my face as I just tried to look around, I had a feeling it wasnt going to be easy.
 
Seth was wearing a tattered brown jacket and had a not-entirely-shaved face and, to be honest, looked a little odd. So when he went up to students and asked them if they had a minute, everyone said no. We went through five or six awkward such rejections until we realized that he should start off by saying he was a tenured professor at Berkeley. Nobody said no after that; apparently people initially thought he was a homeless person.
 
For right or wrong, Id come to think of random people as boring. In part, I think this is because Im shy, and I feel less bad about my inability to make conversation with strangers if I can persuade myself that the conversation isnt going to be worthwhile. After months of trying to make my way through desultory conversations with other Stanford students (What are you studying? Oh, I dont know yet. You? I dont know yet either.) I finally gave up and spent the rest of my time there with my nose in a book.
 
And part, perhaps, is that average people just have a really bad rap. Books complain about the anti-intellectualism of American culture. Professors complain about the students who dont care about the work. Newspapers complain about the ignorant red state-filling wingnuts. The average person seems like a dangerous entity, like the fellow at the lecture with the long and rambling not-quite-a-question that makes you think that maybe elitism isnt such a bad idea after all.
 
And who knows, maybe average people are actually like that. Maybe college towns are funny.
 
We went to three colleges: Stanford, UC Berkeley, and Berkeley City College. The colleges are quite different. Stanford is a large elite school for people who want to become professionals. (Id always heard this from my teachers, that Stanford was a place of people who were pre-med and pre-law and pre-grad school, but I wondered how big the effect was. As I was sitting down to interview our first Stanford subject, I wondered if wed interview enough people to be able to notice the difference. Thats when she explained that she was pre-med.)
 
UC Berkeley is a state school, although a respected one, with a large campus, although mixed in with an interesting city. (Stanford is almost literally surrounded by a moat.) And Berkeley City College is a junior college, in an attractive new building in the middle of the city, full of people who want to transfer out of there and into the real thing.
 
There were differences between the schools, of course, but more noticeable was the basic fundamental similarities. Everyone we spoke to, with one exception, was intelligent, articulate, had coherent thoughts about their situation and its place in the larger context, and was someone I enjoyed talking to. (The one exception was even more thought-provoking and made me wonder what it meant to be intelligent and why I felt so uncomfortable around him.)
 
Seth was much braver than I and took most of the brunt of the conversation, leaving me to observe and reflect quietly. But even just watching random conversations with random people was a thoroughly rewarding experience. I felt as if it was some essential task of humanity that I had heretofore neglected.
 
Everyone we interviewed stands out, but perhaps a few examples will give you the flavor of peoples situations. There was the young man at Stanford who had started a web-based business with his friends from high school. He soon realized that they were in an overcompetitive market and during his first year at Stanford had reconfigured their business plan to target a new space. Meanwhile, he planned to take business classes to get a more academic grounding in his profession.
 
There was the African-American girl at UC Berkeley who loved her courses in African-American Studies, how they revealed a secret history of her country that shed never before heard told. She couldnt see making a living in the subject, of course, but she wanted to study it while she could, before she had to find a real job. A job like, if she had to pick right now, probably teaching.
 
There was the Berkeley City College student who had done three years of college in Chile, spent a couple years in Germany, and now worked in Berkeley as a professional dancer, hoping to get college credit so she could get a job doing Latin American human rights work, ideally for the UN.
 
I am not sure what to say to these people. I understand the paths their lives are on and I see the flaws in the institutions in which they reside, but I have trouble imagining how I can fix things for them, as people. The problem with psychologists, sociologists complain, is that theyre too obsessed with individual people. And the problem with focus groups, even though they were invented by a sociologist, is that people are too obsessed with themselves. They see their problems, they see the context, and they reflect on them, but its not clear to either of us how they can particularly be remedied. The situations are just too big.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 14, 2007
 
The one exception was even more thought-provoking
  and made me wonder what it meant to be intelligent
  and why I felt so uncomfortable around him.
 
We need more datum on this individual.  We have a hunch he must be destroyed, but we cannot proceed without more information.
 
but I have trouble imagining how I can fix things
  for them, as people
 
When people try to truly communicate and help each other in South American countries under the umbrella of United States control, they tend to end up chopped into several pieces in a black trash bag near the side of the road.
 
The mechanism for preventing communication and people helping each other is different inside the United States, but it is probably more effective.
 
The most effective way is to supply a set of resources, findable by motivated individuals.  And pray you are not discovered by the enthusiastic and well-compensated mob of servants of power.
 
Strangely, the right has better developed tools then the left.  Strangely, church groups do a better job of helping the completely disenfranchised.
 
It is almost as if the optimal way to proceed is to create a complete and rigorous analysis of class warfare, act strategically on this analysis, but never mention class, keep it a secret, hide yourself in plain sight among welfare organizations on the right.  Others will join, based on their own private analysis of class warfare, never spoken.
 
But that is silly!  Forget I mentioned it.  What a crazy and silly thing to say!
 
Are you aware of lolcats?  Their leetspeek captioned antics intrigue me.  Your site needs some lolcats.
 
posted by manuelg
 on February 15, 2007 #
 
What was the purpose of your project?
 
posted by Sean Abrahams
 on February 16, 2007 #
 
Aaron,
 
Youd be interested in and would possibly quite conducting this experiment at Oxford. The British university system is less flexible yet more rigorous.
 
The college system at Oxford throws a whole bunch of diverse subjects and nationalities together. My whole time there revolved around amazing random conversations over dinner, in the library, at breakfast etc etc.
 
The only thing that makes things a little harder is British understatement - not everyone feels its acceptable to approach strangers.
 
Best,
 
Sumon
 
posted by Sumon Sadhu
 on February 18, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February 12, 2007
 
Title: Incompleteness: The Proof and Paradox of Kurt Gdel
 

 
Gdel was a hacker. He attended the meetings of the Vienna Circle, one
of the most important philosophical groups in history, and sat quietly,
convinced they were all wrong. Others might try to argue them out of it.
Not Gdel. Perhaps (rightly) he thought that rational argument would get
him nowhere with people so detached from reality. So he decided to
prove them wrong.
 
The result was Gdels incompleteness theorem, one of the most
celebrated results in mathematics and logic, elegantly proving that any
mathematical system complicated enough to do basic arithmetic contains
statements which, while true, cannot be proven within the system.
 
But even this was to no avail, the Vienna Circle continued to insist the
proof was bogus or irrelevant. (The Vienna Circle insisted the world was
simply language-games, with rules and structures. Gdel, by showing
something that was clearly true to us but not provable from within the
game, thought he had proved that such things, like numbers, have an
independent reality.) Gdel, an incredibly odd and delusional figure,
remained quiet for many years, practically confiding only in Albert
Einstein, and little at all after Einsteins death.
 
This is a very bad book. It rambles and prattles and occasionally
repeats itself practically verbatim. (It is the result of a project to
improve science writing simply by paying famous authors to write about
scientific topics. Perhaps the payment should be contingent on some
measure of quality in the result.) But it is a compelling story and
Gdels proof is so brilliantly beautiful that it should be learned by
all educated people. I had never seen it presented in any real detail
before and once I got to its key principle I exclaimed and tossed the
book down and paced, admiring its brilliance. But there are many sources
who will explain the fairly simple idea. Id love to tell you about it
myself.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 12, 2007
 
One of the best explanations of Gdels incompleteness theorem can be found in Douglas R. Hofstadters Gdel, Escher, Bach: an Eternal Golden Braid. The book is highly recommended and really a piece of art itself.
 
posted by amix
 on February 12, 2007 #
 
I dont think that characterization of the Vienna Circle is very accurate. Read the Wikipedia for a better description of their philosophical positions.
 
posted by ThomasW
 on February 12, 2007 #
 
amix, congratulations on being able to get through GEB.  Id heard great things about the book and bought a copy when I saw it in a local bookstore.
 
Unfortunately, he struck me as the nerd equivalent of Wiliam F. Buckley, Jr. in terms of filling a lot of space (WFBJr loves to hear himself talk) while managing to say very little - at least thats what he did in the preface, which turned me off so strongly that I never got into the actual book.
 
posted by Brian Donovan
 on February 12, 2007 #
 
I second amixs recommendation of GEB.
 
If you want a much shorter and more focused intro to Gdels first incompleteness theorem though, see the wonderful exposition of Ernest Nagel and James R. Newman. This last work is the one that piqued the interest of Hofstadter (and Gregory Chaitin and many others) in Gdels theorem when it came out in 50s.
 
There is also an excellent biography by John W. Dawson, Jr..
 
posted by joseph knecht
 on February 12, 2007 #
 
I recall a survey of prominent scientists which asked them which single book they would want to have with them if they were stranded on a desert island - the book mentioned most often by far was Godel, Escher, Bach. I have read it a couple of times myself and it would be the book I would take with me.
 
posted by Ian Gregory
 on February 12, 2007 #
 
As it happens, I just got tickets to see the author lecture through my school. Anyone in Portland care to join me?
 
posted by David McCabe
 on February 13, 2007 #
 
Even Roger Penrose gives an overview of the proof, as well as of most of mathematics and physics :) in the Emperors new Mind.
 
posted by Steve Balogh
 on February 13, 2007 #
 
Not having read New Mind, Id be wary of Penroses exposition. He is a brilliant mathematician, to be sure, but he is also a mystical thinker, and I would be surprised if he didnt mix in, perhaps subtly, unwarranted interpretation or misapplication of the theorems.
 
Penroses approach seems to be: Hmmm, what would I like to be true?  Alright, now how would the universe need to be for that to be possible? And then he goes on to think up a brilliantly clever reason that the universe might be compatible with his desires. For example, quantum morality (scare quotes, not quoting Penrose), or the massless charged particle he postulates to get cyclical time.
 
Disclaimer: I could be misunderstanding and misrepresenting him  his lectures are difficult to follow.
 
posted by David M.
 on February 14, 2007 #
 
Ill second amix recommandation. GEB is a very interresting and well written book. And unfortunately for you, the french translation bring event more to it. Douglas Hofstadter wrote the french preface to the french translation himself.
 
Apart of this, this book is really brilliant !
 
posted by Franois Granger
 on February 14, 2007 #
 
You might be interested in E. C. R. Hehners version of the proof; see his paper Beautifying Godel for details.
 
The distinction between program and data, the use of the character string data type, the use of an interpreter, and counting from zero allow the proof to be reduced to three lines.
 
posted by Alan
 on February 15, 2007 #
 
I second Brians recommendation to skip GEB. Its very cleverly written, but the insights it offers are few. For example: the author dedicates a sonnet to Russels paradox when a sentence would suffice. Its also guilty of jumping to the exciting popular science subjects - AI, DNA, robots, etc. - while providing little background or depth.
 
posted by 
 on February 16, 2007 #
 
But its so very clever!
 
posted by David M.
 on February 17, 2007 #
 
Actually, Id advise you to try reading the original paper, which you can find here: http://www.research.ibm.com/people/h/hirzel/papers/canon00-goedel.pdf (and there are other translations too, some of them using either the original or a newer logic notation); try googling for on formally undecidable and Gdel.
 
Its very interesting to read the proof itself, instead of the usual human-translation.
 
posted by Hernan Moraldo
 on February 24, 2007 #
 
GEB is very lucid if extremely long-winded and tangential.  I had a great time reading it as a teenager.  I dont know if Id have the patience for it now.  But it presents Gdels proof in a way thats both complete (no serious technical gaps) and quite accessible to non-math people.  I later took the standard intro-to-mathematical-logic class (Math 125A at Berkeley) whose main result is Gdels proof, and found I already understood the subject pretty well just from having read GEB.  However, if you want a more serious (but still accessible) treatment from a standard math book, Herbert Endertons Introduction to Mathematical Logic is quite good.  It treats proof theory, model theory, and I think discusses axiomatic set theory to some extent, though he has a separate book for that.  Really, everyone should know a bit about this stuff.
 
Wikipedias coverage of these subjects is also quite good.  I guess Id start with [[Mathematical logic]] and follow the links from there.
 
posted by Paul
 on March  1, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February 12, 2007
 
Title: Its Faust!
 
In response to my post on underachieving Harvard presidents, Harvard has named Drew Faust to be its new president (and the first woman).
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 12, 2007
 
With respect, you are in error. Drew Gilpin Faust earned this postion by her own considerable merits, and you can be certain that this was settled long before your post.
 
posted by 
 on February 12, 2007 #
 
The attempt (by an anonymous commentor) to minimize the causative effect on your posting about Harvards presidency flies in the face of reason.
 
A simple chronological analysis makes it clear that the naming of a woman as president of Harvard was In response to my post
 
By seeking to cast FUD on your position in this chain, anonymous shows an attempt to write history without first qualifying for the well-known fact that history is written by the victors.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on February 12, 2007 #
 
I feel that the simplest way to understand universities is that they are bureaucracies sustained by transferring wealth from the state and alumni.
 
I dont see how to prove it, but I feel that providing a real educational experience to the undergraduates would have the risk of jeopardizing this wealth transfer.
 
Anyway, I need answers to three questions:
 
1) What groups or individuals are actually undergoing an educational experience (educational experience defined as mastering a body of knowledge either to (directly) form values and further goals, or (indirectly) learn general techniques of developing such a mastery; where this experience is directed by a specialist)
 
2) Is it possible for an educational experience to be provided to the general population?
 
3) Is providing a educational experience necessary for humans to experience the benefits of their worth and potential?
 
My guesses:
 
1) Practically nothing worth calling education takes place in any human society.  All successful education experiences occur in the margins in fleeting circumstances.
 
2) It is possible to provide an educational experience to the general population, but no wholesale technique will be effective.  The only effective route is to encourage individual teachers to lead small groups of individual students.  It would be the most expensive thing society would do, its expense would be far greater than any entitlement government currently provides.
 
3) Providing a educational experience is necessary for humans to experience the benefits of their worth and potential.
 
Now my main point
 
Why is the Internets so much better than providing pictures of lolcats than answering these questions?  Am I using my brower wrong?  Is there a Firefox extension I am missing?
 
Aaron, now that you are underemployed, are you working on fixing the Interweb?
 
posted by manuelg
 on February 12, 2007 #
 
I bet if you read books as hard as you can, for a long enough time, you will eventually learn something.
 
I wouldnt know. Im illiterate.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on February 13, 2007 #
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on February 13, 2007 #
 
About institutions visit Ivan Illich entry in Wikipedia and the full text of Deschooling Society
 
For other de-institutional ideas google Wolf Wolfensberger and see his treatise
 
Love
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on February 13, 2007 #
 
Faust is the female Bok  shell look good, say the right things, but shes a career academic who wont rock the boat or make big reforms.
 
posted by Same Old
 on February 14, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February 11, 2007
 
Title: The Activists Creed
 
True, those who have abandoned the life of a free man do nothing but boast incessantly of the peace and repose they enjoy in their chains. But when I see the other sacrifice pleasures, repose, wealth, power and life itself for the preservation of this sole good, which is so disdained by those who have lost it, when I see multitudes of entirely naked savages scorn European voluptuousness and endure hunger, fire, the sword and death to preserve only their independence, I feel it does not behoove slaves to reason about freedom.
 
(Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Second Treatise on Inequality)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February 11, 2007
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February  9, 2007
 
Title: Our Underachieving College Presidents
 

 
It would seem absurd to claim that nobody cares about the quality of higher education. After all, anyone paying attention can name a dozen bestselling polemics off the top of their head  The Closing of the American Mind, The University in Ruins, Tenured Radicals, Higher Superstitions. But as Derek Bok points out in his quietly subversive new book, Our Underachieving Colleges, these commentators have treated universities largely as a punching bag for their political and professional views, rather than out of any genuine concern for the education of the students.
 
A classic example are the heated debates about what should be in the core curriculum. Should the humanities be required? Should things be focused around the great books? What about classes in writing and public speaking? Professors will happily argue about the proper allocation of required classes for hours, but youll never once hear them comment about the way in which these classes are taught. And without decent technique, it doesnt matter what the topic of the class is.
 
Bok shows deep familiarity with a largely-hidden literature about the effectiveness of college teaching. Nearly 80 percent of all college courses are simply lectures by professors, a stunningly ineffective form of teaching. By the end of a lecture, a student remembers less than half of what was taught. Only a week later, that number is down to 20%. At such stunning rates, its hard to imagine much is left after a month, let alone by the time the student gets out of college.
 
And yet nobody seems to care one whit. Bok is hardly to be excepted from this criticism. After the Larry Summers scandal, he was appointed acting president of Harvard University (and before that he was president from 1971 to 1991). Bok expects to only have the job for a year and no doubt his hands are tied in many ways  but rumor about campus is that he wants to make his year count. Yet Boks biggest changes have been a recommendation for more hands-on activities and the elimination of early admissions. Not bad moves, by any means, but hardly anything like the deep rethinking Boks book suggests is necessary.
 
But if Bok  a thoughtful and intelligent figure who has written eloquently about these problems  cant use his position  the most prominent spot in the entire field, with the deadline already on his head freeing him from any accountability  cant do anything about these problems, what hope do we possibly have? Opportunities like this come around once a century and it appears that Bok is going to blow it.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February  9, 2007
 
Doesnt the argument that you only remember half of what was taught in a lecture miss the point?  You can always make whatever point you desire by carefully choosing what thing to measure.  I never thought that the point of my college classes was to remember every single fact that was stated during the class.  The point was to use those facts and the relationships between them to learn how to think about the material presented.  Of course even that goal is not achieved very well, but lets at least be clear about what the goal is.  No method of teaching would result in the students remembering as many facts as are recited during a typical lecture.
 
posted by Mark
 on February 10, 2007 #
 
http://www.digitaljournal.com/article/111431/Harvard_is_Poised_to_Pick_First_Woman_President
 
posted by a news 
 on February 10, 2007 #
 
A few questions:
 
What exactly is it that you expect Bok
to accomplish in his year as interrim
president, Aaron?  Big educational
institutions are slow moving beasts,
with complex traditions that take
generations to change.
 
What would you suggest as an alternative
to lectures, for professors to use as a
method of imparting their arguments and
evidence to students?  Its not like the
retention rate from reading a book is
particularly high either, but weve been
using books and lectures for millenia for
passing along academic discourse to each
new generation.
 
Note that at schools like Harvard,
lectures and readings are complemented
by discussion sections and papers, in
which students are forced to reflect on
the topics of the course.  Do you have
some better method in mind?
 
I think you have disproportionate expectations of Boks brief return to the presidency, and perhaps of the university presidency in general.  University presidents in general, and Bok in particular, have a caretaking role rather than a reforming one.  The best university president keeps an institution running smoothly, conciliating disagreements between different groups, and generally encouraging concensus in group decision-making.  This was one of Larry Summerss biggest problems; he tried to lead the faculty by strong-arm tactics, and they pushed back.
 
Undoubtedly there is always room for improvements and change in any institutions, and that is certainly true for both Harvard College (your essay seems to focus on undergraduate education) and Harvard University more generally.  But there arent any silver bullets here.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on February 11, 2007 #
 
In solving problems in the real world, one has four variables: time, money, quantity, and quality. No doubt the a year as a university president is very high quality, but quantity is clearly fixed. As president he has access to some amount of the endowment and annual funds, but far from all of them. So, within those constraints, he can solve a certain number of problems. Im inclined to agree with Jacob Rus: Bok can grand-stand some paper-thin solutions to big problems, or he can solve some small problems well. Personally, given that choice, Id go for solving small problems well.
 
What would you do?
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on February 11, 2007 #
 
Saw him on C-span while ago and he sure illustrated that its entire USA situation thing, over generations, over many camps with their own povs and interest and thick reaction habits.
 
I dont know he is really devising a plan (even idealistic and may not actualize, but worth putting down and show to public) for whole scale solution or improvement - or not. But it seemed he knows enough bolts and nuts.
 
Its a pity that we dont have big space in the middle of the room to talk about those things, clearly and openly (on the net) but only corners, here, c-span book tv, and amazon online book store only.
 
I dont know then why he hasnt set up a web forum and releasing his book (and whole plan and analysis) in pdf for free or donations.
 
Shall we suggest him?
 
posted by We all use web in underachieving ways
 on February 11, 2007 #
 
Harvard is an interesting case study because the amount of decentralization here is massive and legendary.  Making fundamental changes to a faculty like FAS cant be easy, and I imagine the best thing the new president of the University can do to effect major change in undergraduate teaching is to appoint a new dean for the Faculty of Arts and Sciences with a strong vision for such change, and support him or her in the quest for reform.
 
posted by Danny Silverman
 on February 11, 2007 #
 
Also, whatever else anyone says, there is no one more qualified than Derek Bok to be interrim president at Harvard.  His experience and tact are matched only by his love of the institution.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on February 12, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February  8, 2007
 
Title: The Enemy Too Close to Home
 
How bizarre a book is The Enemy At Home, Dinesh DSouzas new screed insisting the left is responsible for Islamic extremism? Pretty bizarre. The books argument, according to the Times is that 1) that the American left is allied to the Islamic radical movement to undermine the Bush White House and American foreign policy; and 2) that the left is the primary reason for Islamic anti-Americanism because liberals defend and promote values that are controversial in America and deeply revolting to people in traditional societies, especially in the Muslim world.
 
Follow that? The left is allies with Islamic extremists because the extremists hate the left. Just like Dinesh DSouza. [W]hen it comes to core beliefs, he writes, Id have to confess that Im closer to the dignified fellow in the long robe and prayer beads than to the slovenly fellow with the baseball cap [Michael Moore].
 
In other words, it sounds like the right is allied with Islamic extremists in hating the liberal elements of American culture. What to do about this is left as an exercise to the reader.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February  8, 2007
 
Dinesh DSouza has lost it.
 
posted by Ethan
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
Does he think hes the first one to realize that American religious extremists have plenty in common with foreign religious extremists? Isnt that what Liberals have been shrieking since September 2001?
 
I guess he got a little thrown off by all his hatred. If you hate liberals, and you hate Islamic extremists, there has to be something linking them, right?
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
Taken to its logical conclusion, it reads like: If there are no more liberals in America, Islamic extremists wont hate America. There will be no more terrorism and we can all live happily ever after.
 
posted by Krishna Kumar
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
Watch Colbert utterly destroy Dinesh, if you havent already seen it:
 
http://www.comedycentral.com/motherload/?ml_video=80900
 
posted by david mathers
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
This reminds me of ESRs screeds of a few years back, before he fell off the radar. These reside somewhere on his blog, here: http://esr.ibiblio.org/
 
posted by David M.
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
Watch John Leach summarize ESRs entire life in a 3 pane comic strip, if you havent already seen it:
 
http://geekz.co.uk/lovesraymond/archive/show-them-the-code
 
posted by david mathers
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
The islamic fundamentalist situation has to be utterly confounding to right wingers. Prior to 9-11, an accellerating meme was that Christians, Muslims, and Jews would bind together into a monotheistic conglomo-religion in opposition to godless liberalism. See Peter Kreeft for the best example of this. Also, it cant help that the Bush familiy has longstanding ties to the Kingdom of Saud, who are major exporter of radical ismaili islam.
 
posted by armchair philosopher
 on February  9, 2007 #
 
In reality both the islamic fundamentalist and the christian fundamentalist  seek to make religion the basis of secular power, and to subject democratic lawmaking to religious scrutiny and control.
 
posted by Branedy
 on February 10, 2007 #
 
Yes, after watching DSouza on Colberts show, Im not sure its even worth reading reviews of the book.  His argument is truly wacky.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on February 11, 2007 #
 
Saudi Arabia does not export Ismaili Islam (whatever that is).  Ismailis are a tiny Shia off-shoot.
 
posted by Faried Nawaz
 on February 16, 2007 #
 
It is bizarre to think that american extremists are allied with any other extremists in the world. Extremists are trying to lead the majority of thier county into thier way of thinking. If they did not use religious they would use some thing else.
 
posted by rickaltemus
 on February 22, 2007 #
 
Once a hater always a hater
 
posted by Joey Shitaskey
 on February 27, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February  8, 2007
 
Title: Getting Past
 
He called me into his office. It was an imposing room, wood paneling and a window opening on to a picturesque view of the water. An ornate light fixture hung from the ceiling, illuminating the mahogany desk, neatly organized with boxes OUT and IN, with a stack of paper, with a pad for writing on. There was no computer. He didnt need a computer. A computer would have ruined the look.
 
The walls were lined with bookshelves and the bookshelves were lined with management texts. Books on how to make people eat cheese, how to make them say yes, how to make them think positive thoughts, how to make them get rich. Books on locks and unlocking, thoughts and unthinking, beings and unbeing.
 
Take a seat, Geoffrey, he said, looking at me from behind glasses, a tailored suit hanging on his frame. I obeyed, as I always did. It was an order.
 
Theres been concern around the office, he said. No agent. Not people are concerned, not Im concerned, simply that theres been concern, as if it was some poisonous gas that had been leaking out of my cubicle, green fumes floating in mid-air.
 
Theres been concern that youre not being a team player. A sports metaphor. Here we are, all rocketing towards the goal, filing our TPS reports in tandem, and me? Im not being a team player. Im sitting in the corner playing Minesweeper or one of those online flash games with the little jewels. The teams let down. Im holding everyone up.
 
I think that the best way forward is for us to get past this, he explains. Isnt that always the case? If were on a path, and theres a rock, then obviously we have to go past it to go forward. We could go a different direction, but then we wouldnt be going forward anymore. But how did I become a rock?
 
Its clear to all of us, he says. But whos us? Theres only him here. Its clear to all of us that your hearts not in it. I imagine myself, lying on the surgery table, the bright light shining from above, with an army of hims surrounding me; theyre the us. One of him asks another for the scalpel, takes it, begins cutting out my still-beating heart. Aha, they think, his hearts not in it  its still in him.
 
They toss the heart in the trash and file out. They need to interview another job candidate.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February  8, 2007
 
Those in a closed world group always know who needs to be rejected to maintain the group as such. It only hurts while your heart is still in the group. Welcome to the outside world :)
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
Somedays I wish this would happen to me.
 
posted by Anonymous
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February  7, 2007
 
Title: The Logic of Open DRM
 
In his recent essay, Thoughts on Music, Apple CEO Steve Jobs has called for the labels to stop requiring him to sell their music with DRM. Most of his argument is that the labels already sell the vast majority of their music perfect digital copies without DRM  namely, CDs  but he also argues that the alternative of having an open DRM system is impossible.
 
Jobs is less than clear here. He writes: There is no theory of protecting content other than keeping secrets. In other words, even if one uses the most sophisticated cryptographic locks to protect the actual music, one must still hide the keys which unlock the music on the users computer or portable music player. No one has ever implemented a DRM system that does not depend on such secrets for its operation.
 
Since this is a fairly important point and no one else is explaining what he means, I thought Id give it a try.
 
DRM works by encrypting songs. Encryption works by performing a mathematical scrambling operation that can only be reversed with the right key. As a very simple example, imagine you have the message hello and the key 5. One simple encryption system is to simply move each letter five letters forward (so a becomes f) and you get mjqqt. To decode it, you just need to know the number 5 and move each letter back that far. (This is a very bad encryption system, for a lot of reasons, but it works the same basic way as the good ones.)
 
The way DRM works, essentially, is that when you buy a song from the iTunes store its encrypted with a certain secret key (presumably one a lot bigger than the number 5). To play the music, you need the key to decrypt it. But the only software that has the key is iTunes and iTunes will only decrypt it if youre following their rules  only playing it on 5 separate machines, for example.
 
For Open DRM to work, Apple would need to give the key to other people who made music players. But as soon as Apple gives the key to someone, they can do whatever they want with the music. If the key gets out on the Internet, anyone can decrypt the songs. DRM only works because the key is secret. Open DRM is an oxymoron.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February  7, 2007
 
I thought this was such a smart move on Apples part, not only as a negotiating tactic with the labels (his note got top left attention on the cover of todays Wall St. Journalbut will it work?), but as a good-will winner for the public, especially after that NY Times article a few weeks back. I think the labels already know the DRM game is up, I think they have long known its up, and its time to move on.
 
posted by Carl Tashian
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
On this subject there is Cory Doctorows DRM talk at microsoft, http://www.dashes.com/anil/stuff/doctorow-drm-ms.html
 
posted by Damien Pollet
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
Aaron, the typical DRM system is a bit more complex.
 
Besides secret (aka symmetric) keys there are public and private keys (aka asymmetric) of which only the private one has to be kept secret and hidden and the public one can be known and shared.
 
Content is typically encrypted by a secret key. This is an individual key per content and not known to the device prior to receiving the content. Its not a shared key as you assumed.
 
Now that key is wrapped by a public key and can only be extracted again by using the matching private key. Which public key? Each device must have a unique key pair. The private key might be stored on a smart card which is generally considered tamper proof. Most mobile devices work this way nowadays.
 
The associated public key is know sent to the service that will issue the wrapped key to the device. That service will be able to check whether that device is allowed to receive the wrapped key. It then wraps the encryption key so that only the identified device can unwrap it.
 
A device must never disclose the content key. Its manufacturer can be forced to assure this by contract. Using the smard card (or a trusted computing module) is one good way. The manufacturer will be sued if he creates a device that leaks the secret key. It is his responsibility to fix the leak or pay.
 
All affected devices - identified by the public key - can be excluded from further service. Because all keys are individually protected, one leaked private key cannot harm the system in general.
 
This is the way for example Microsofts DRM works. It IS practical to license it to third parties. Its more a thing of control and user lock-in than a technical problem.
 
posted by DRM
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
Quite ironic coming from Jobs, considering no one is forcing him to put DRM on iTMS albums like Sleater-Kinneys Dig Me Out. (eMusic sells the same album DRM-free.) Jobs chooses to use DRM, presumably because its in Apples best interests (for the time being).
 
On a related note, Mike Hearn has an interesting post about the difficulty (impossibility?) of breaking hardware-based DRM systems:
 
http://plan99.net/~mike/blog/2007/01/25/on-drm/
 
posted by Alan
 on February 10, 2007 #
 
Agreeing with Alan, I was confused about why Apple did not offer ANY songs without DRM.  It seems likely there are a number of artists who would not mind boosting their sales by selling their songs without DRM, and it cant be too impossibly technical to do this iTunes, since all theyd be doing is NOT encrypting songs that were flagged to be not encrypted.
 
I couldnt figure out a good explanation of why they would be doing this.  The thing from Jobs seems to indicate that they want music fans to direct their displeasure at the music industry giants.  It seems that if Jobs was at all anti-DRM he would have this option for publishers to not have DRM on their songs.  Any ideas?
 
posted by Christopher Hesse
 on March  8, 2007 #
 
DRM: I was only addressing software systems (like iTunes) in this piece, in which tamperproof cards are impractical and the public/private key bit is kind of irrelevant.
 
Alan: It looks like time has proved you entirely wrong about that.
 
Chris: My assumption was that the interface complexity for having both DRM and non-DRM wasnt worth it to Jobs for just a handful of indie artists.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on April 12, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February  7, 2007
 
Title: Neurosis #9
 
So here I am. Were somewhere over a dark patch in the middle of the country and Im in the window seat in the last row in the plane. The guy in front of mes leaning all the way back, but Im in the last row so my seat doesnt go back, and I have to lift my legs up to stretch out a muscle that was sitting funny while I was asleep. So here I sit, scrunched up in the the last row of the plane, my thighs hugged against my chest, my knees digging into the seat in front of me, my back curved funny from being unable to recline. But thats not the problem.
 
No, the problem is that I am terribly, almost unbearably, thirsty. My mouth has been dry for hours, were long past that. Now Im so thirsty that the color has drained from my face, because there simply is no fluid left to keep it there. I am so thirsty that its beginning to feel like theres no water around to hydrate my brain so my neocortex is getting and shrivelling up. Its an odd feeling, your brain shriveling up. It makes it hard to think. But I guess thats not really the problem either.
 
The problem, the real problem I suppose, is that I cant ask for anything to drink. I am perfectly justified  I was asleep during the drink service, I am quite terribly thirsty, my flight is unusually uncomfortable to begin with  yet I cannot bring myself to do it. As the flight attendants walk briskly by, I fail to catch their eyes. And the a man sitting in the seat next to me on the aisle has headphones on, so I cant exactly interrupt him. I could ring my flight attendant call button, but Ive never quite been able to bring myself to do that. Im so close to the flight attendants anyway.
 
If I rang the call button, I tell myself, I wouldnt ask for a Sprite. Id just ask for water. Asking for a Sprite, itd seem like I was interrupting them just so I could get my soda fix. Like I was some sort of petulant child who had to have his soda and was going to throw a temper tantrum if they didnt get it. Like a troublemaker, the kind of person they look down on. But water? Water theyd understand: it was a genuine medical request, a normal, physical human need. Something totally worth taking the extraordinary step of pressing the flight attendant call button.
 
But I cant bring myself to do it. It seems like such an imposition.
 
This, I suppose, is the actual problem: I feel my existence is an imposition on the planet. Not a huge one, perhaps, not a huge one at all, but an imposition nonetheless. When I go to a library and I see the librarian at her desk reading, Im afraid to interrupt her, even though she sits there specifically so that she may be interrupted, even though being interrupted by for reasons like this by people like me is her very job. At the fast food restaurant, I feel embarrassed taking time to pick through my pocket for appropriate change, so I always give them whole bills, then feel embarrassed when they have to take the time to count me out change. When someone asks me what high school Im going to, I feel awkward explaining to them that Ive gone to high school and to college and then started a company and sold it, so I just stutter a bit and then tell them that my high school is outside of Chicago.
 
I realize this is neurotic. Maybe not the high school thing, maybe thats just politeness, but certainly the thing right now, the brain shriveling with the knees digging and yet still the fear of asking for some water. This is neurotic, Aaron, I say to myself. You are being neurotic. It is not normal to be this shy. And geez, certainly you of all people have little justification for being so undemanding.
 
I am a good person, I mean. I work hard, I happily pay my taxes, I think of ways to make the world a better place, I always look the woman behind the counter in the eye and say thank you, thank you, as if I really mean it, as if I really do appreciate the effort it took for her punch my order into her cash register and withdraw the right amount of change. And I do! So I deserve this, I deserve my glass of water, my can of soda. I am not like one of those people who goes around robbing banks and mugging old ladies and then stands in front of me in the supermarket line, throwing a tantrum about how dare the clerk not accept my credit card. No, I am perfectly justified in asking for a glass of water. I know all this, and yet, somehow, I still feel like an imposition.
 
Normally, its not so bad feeling this way. Normally, I just sit in my quiet little room and do the small things that bring me pleasures. I read my books, I answer email, I write a little bit. Im not such a nuisance to the world, and the kick I get out of living can, I suppose, justify the impositions I make on it. But when life isnt so fun, well, then I start to wonder. Whats the point of going on if its just trouble for us both?
 
My friends will miss me, I am told. And I guess its somewhat better around friends. For some reason asking them for things doesnt seem quite so bad. Perhaps weve established some rapport, perhaps I feel Ive given them enough to justify my small requests, perhaps I feel like my friends are special people who think along the same lines I do and thus understand my needs. (Inner critic: Yeah, only a fellow genius would understand your special need for water. Jesus, what a dweeb.) But even so, I feel reticent. Even among my closest friends, I still feel like something of an imposition, and the slightest shock, the slightest hint that Im correct, sends me scurrying back into my hole.
 
I know, I know, Im wrong, Im wrong to feel this way. My friends love me. They remark, spontaneously, about how nice it is to have me around. They invite me over to their houses to hang out. Indeed, at this very moment, two of my very favorite people to hang out with are actually fighting  fighting!  over the supposed privilege of having me live with them. I just want to point out, one says, that I have never tickled you. I just want to point out, replies the other, that I have never gotten you to attach clothespins to your face.
 
Clearly, rationally, I am in the wrong. These people like me. (Inner cynic: If only to have someone around to tickle and pinch.) No, no, they genuinely like me. But the idea that people might actually want to be around me takes an amazing amount of getting used to. Last night, for the first time, I invited some people over to my apartment. Ive never done this before. But, to my amazement, they all came. They even brought their friends. I ran out of chairs. The idea that a group of people would want to come over to see me was kind of stunning. Someone even brought wine.
 
OK, so perhaps there is a small group of people who, whether through quirks of genetics or some childhood trauma, appear, as best as I can tell, to actively enjoy my company. (Inner elitist: Or just need excuses to drink wine?) But this does not excuse my impositions on the store clerk, the librarian, the man inquiring after my high school who I downright lied to  lied to!  just to avoid pointing out the error of his preconceptions, the bus driver who I had to distract with my inability to use the new stored-value payment machines, or the waiter at that restaurant I went to the other day who, I later realized to my endless mortification, I forgot to properly tip. (Waiter, if youre out there, please send me your address so I can mail you your tip! Im so sorry!) These people did not request the dubious pleasure of my company. I have no justification for bothering them with my requests.
 
Oh, but you know, I really want some water
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February  7, 2007
 
I humbly suggest that next, you impose on a therapist.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
Hi Aaron,
 
I hope this is a nap time or low blood-sugar level kind of a post, rather than feelings you are having all the time.  Heres my angle on it.  Im sorry if this advice doesnt seem to attack your actual problem but hopefully it will be useful.
 
I think a lot of people feel like this at least some of the time.  (Morrissey made a career out of it, even.)  My advice, for what its worth, is that you put your big intellect to work on the problem.  Im sure if you treat it as a challenge of that sort you can find some angle of attack that will help you with the problem.
 
Strangely, the best piece of advice about getting the courage to do things that I ever heard was in the movie Three Kings.
 
Archie Gates: Youre scared, right?
Conrad Vig: Maybe.
Archie Gates: The way it works is, you do the thing youre scared shitless of, and you get the courage AFTER you do it, not before you do it.
Conrad Vig: Thats a dumbass way to work. It should be the other way around.
Archie Gates: I know. Thats the way it works.
 
Once you accept that, you can do a scary thing knowing that it will give you the courage to do that same thing and other things like it in the future.
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
Overcoming shyness, like everything else, takes practice.
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
This made me smile, although it probably shouldnt. Its nice to know someone feels the same way as I do. I also make up white unnecessary lies just to avoid attention from other people. And I also feel awkward around even close friends (not to mention strangers), even though I know they like me. Its just a thing Im born with I guess. Other people just dont understand what the problem is - Im socially capable and all - it just really makes me anxious being around people sometimes. I guess therapy might help, but Ive never really looked into it.
 
On the other hand, I remember it was really nervewrecking when I was around your age (Im 29 now). It gets a bit better with age, so stick with it though.
 
Chin up and thanks for a nice read.
 
posted by Matt
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
Some of the behavior you describe, especially the unwillingness to bother others, sounds like introversion.
 
Theres plenty to read about introversion online.  I suggest the article Caring for Your Introvert.
 
Also, the book The Introvert Advantage, although a bit pop-psy, is very informative.
 
(introversion != shyness)
 
posted by Kris
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
This, I suppose, is the actual problem: I feel my existence is an imposition on the planet.
 
I felt like that for a long time. Then one day I looked at what Id done in my life to that point and decided that it was enough, that I had contributed enough to the world to pay back what Id cost it. And after that I didnt worry about it so much.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
I suffered from #9 a lot when I was younger and still do somewhat.  As others have said though, time helps.
 
If youre flying lots, do yourself a favor and get a mileage card (apply online to avoid imposing on a real person!).  They dont cost anything and just by virtue of having one youll get seats with more leg room (United calls them Economy Plus seats - Im assuming all airlines have something similar but YMMV).
 
posted by William Bland
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
Its cool.  You dont have to justify your existence.  As the Neil Gaiman character said: You get what everyone gets; you get a lifetime.  Part of why the people who like being around you like that (me, included), is that indefinable thing called your uniqueness.  Statistical thinking to the contrary, there really is only one you right here, right now.  Inspire yourself as you inspire others.  As someone said - I think it was you - dare to think big! ;-)
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
Ben Donely
 
Well, its probably good that he is disclosing - and doing kind of elementary introspection lit(erature) thing. I believe thats what tend to be missing from regular/main stream Anglo-Saxon culture. (calling it exhibitionist and so on but alas in past 50 years or so counseling industry took hold of Americans.)
 
I agree TD Baker in some way, that if Asw starts to look into how our brains work and starts reading that field, hed find many research dealing with or dealing with something close to what he suffers (and/or enjoys).
 
posted by some parts of brain is just automatic
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
Its great for us spectators that hes disclosing, SPOBISJA, as he discloses so nicely, but hes also wrong about a few big things in such a way that may require someone well trained to interrupt or assist in his introspection. Repeatedly.
 
Clearly Aaron is as smart as people come, but everyone takes time off from being smart, or has things they arent smart about.
 
For example, if Aaron were to check out, that would be the biggest imposition he could possibly make on the people that he cares most about. It would be the largest possible amount of harm to the most people that anyone like Aaron could ever do. Either he cant figure that out because hes not equipped for it, or he knows that and theres some reason he leans towards that imposition anyway.
 
Both of those are problems that cant always be solved by brain power + introspection. Or casual friendly insight.
 
Aaron, I imagine, hopefully, that youre happily imposing on a therapist. If you arent, please start.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
Its interesting how many people have this problem.  Its also interesting how many people see things like being asked for a minor favor as impositions.  The latter is the more serious problem, really.
 
Maybe by imposing on people to do reasonable things, and by carrying out the imposition reasonably nicely, one can train stingy asses to be kinder, more generous souls!
 
posted by italo
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
Okay, I get your points. > Ben Donely
 
I didnt know - that your concerns were coming from with, say, depth. (Because Ive only seen one-liners.)
 
I believe his parents, and family are there first, they have net connections and reading - every day - every single post by him, I bet, and I dont believe Y combinator and Reddit people, and many more people who knows him and around him, just dont care about him anymore. I just think those people who knows him close and well are doing the assessment rightly and letting him going on his own ways.
 
(No?)
 
posted by SPOBISJAO
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
Yes, SPOBISJAO, I am sure that his friends and family are there first. Thats why my original answer was flip. Some weirdo that Aaron met on the bus isnt going to be the most knowledgeable or helpful person for him.
 
Hopefully his friends and family are all up on their game.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on February  8, 2007 #
 
Aaron, you need a Just Shy shirt from xkcd. ;)
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on February 11, 2007 #
 
To me, the really interesting angle on this is that people like to be asked for help, for favors, to do things for each other.  Its how we feel useful.  When you forgo imposing, youre also declining to offer that person the chance to be involved in the world more, via you.  Of course, this varies with the favor and all, but if its something that you feel is part of who you are, and youre not already being asked for it too often, then the chance to give, to benefit another person, is a part of what makes life worth living.  I like to be asked.  I like to give.
 
But  you knew this, I bet. :)
 
posted by Sonia Lyris
 on February 15, 2007 #
 
I have such trouble imposing on others that I cant bring myself to fill out expense reports at work. It takes an extreme focus of will for me to overcome my not wanting to ask for anything long enough to send one of these in. Like you, being reimbursed for work-incurred expenses is something to which I am certainly entitled. In fact, I ask for far less in terms of supplies, etc. than most other employees with my company, and I complain very little. I just - can hardly force myself to do it.
 
posted by Tess
 on August 30, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February  6, 2007
 
Title: Justifications for Myself
 
Youre at a party and you find yourself sitting next to an rather geeky-looking fellow with thick black glasses. He looks like a nice enough guy and, after all, making smalltalk is only polite, so you ask him what he does. Im an entomologist, he explains. Oh, you say, stalling for time. An entomologist. You search your databanks for something you can say regarding entomology. Doesnt it get boring pasting all those little bugs onto those little cards? you say. He looks you straight in the eye. Actually, no, he says. Its not like that at all.
 
Michael Brub seems to often find himself as that man at the party. As an academic at a state college in Pennsylvania, hes surrounded by Republicans who want to cut off public support for tenured radicals like him. As a postmodern literary theorist who writes for public-interest journals, hes surrounded by those who think his field is meaninglessly obscure. As a professor of cultural studies, hes surrounded by those who think hes wasting his time researching trash. And as a cultural leftist with liberal political views, hes surrounded by friends who find his nuanced political views a personal affront.
 
In Rhetorical Occasions, Brub collects a series of essays, speeches, articles, and blog posts in which he tries his best to defend himself from all such charges. And while that doesnt sound like a recipe for good literature, he makes it work. Like my entomologist friend, Brub is such a kind-hearted, clear-spoken fellow that its fun to simply hear him out. The result is a book even better than Brubs 2006 bestseller, Whats Liberal About the Liberal Arts?
 
The difference is that this time Brub is writing for his fellow insiders, not outsiders, so instead of his cleaned-up defense of academic life and his tidied-up summaries of freshman classes, you get the real dirt on the way people dig knives into each other at MLA meetings and excerpts from graduate introductory courses.
 
The book isnt always perfect. Brubs writes clearly and well, but sometimes even his careful explanations assume a bit too much background from the reader. It sounds almost like a Monty Python bit, he says at one point; you expect to hear next that Alexander Kerensky was defeated by the experimental poetics of the Opoyaz group, and that the Battle of the Journals set the terms for the Second Congress of Soviets in October 1917. I have to admit, that was not what I was expecting to hear next.
 
And while Brub is fairly good about mentioning his opponents arguments (and this is a book with a lot of opponents, from ice hockey players to Stanley Fish), he sometimes responds to them with an obtuseness that borders on intellectual dishonesty. He notes that he was derided on the far left [for] my craven desire to break into corporate mass media by repudiating Chomsky. I wrote it for Context: A Forum for Literary Arts and Culture, [a journal] not available for purchase anywhere in the country. It is distributed only to independent bookstores, in print runs of five thousand. So I wonder just how much further from the corporate mass media Chomskys fans would like me to get before I am permitted to disagree with them. Its one of the books best lines, at least until you get a couple essays later when you find Brub reprised the criticism for an op-ed in the Boston Globe.
 
But the meat of the book is not in Brubs politics (which, reprising discussions between 9/11 and the war in Iraq, actually made me feel queasy), but in his academics. In even intellectual popular culture, its hard to find examples of postmodern literary theory that are anything other than critics taking a whack or exponents making it easy for them. Alan Sokal gets up and says that social constructionism is absurd and Stanley Fish fights back by insisting the rules of physics are just as manmade as the rules of baseball. Roger Kimball complaints that postmodern theorists are being deliberately obtuse and Slavoj iek responds by wondering whether Heideggers deconstruction of the metaphysics of subjectivity  undermine[s] the very possibility of a philosophically grounded resistance.
 
But Brub manages to make such debates seem comprehensible and, whats more, worth comprehending. Brubs passing references to Stephen Greenblatt, Catherine Gallagher, nancy Armstrong, Even Sedgwick, and Judith Butler makes you think that recognizing such names is as much a duty of an educated person as following Sokals references to Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, and (as in famous footnote 26) Rebecca Goldstein.
 
I just hope there are more patient teachers like Brub to help one finish the job.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February  6, 2007
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February  3, 2007
 
Title: San Francisco
 
So I find myself back in California, sings Quasi. And so I do. I spend half my life trying to get here, I spend the rest trying to get away. But here I finally am, and perhaps its time to simply give in.
 
California is large; it contains multitudes. Locals claim the peninsula is so big and irregular that it even contains microclimates  areas with different weather patterns. There is the glorious hill of Alamo Square, near the apartment I stay in, from which you can see the houses featured in the opening credits of Full House and watch the city stretch out below you. As you cross the street to head to the park, if you turn your head in the middle to watch for cars, you see a glorious road roll downwards, ending at a monumental city hall building, a glowing golden dome.
 
Or if you climb Twin Peaks, the hill overlooking Noe Valley, one night, the streetlights make the buildings below look like cardboard backdrops and a rolling grid of points of light sweeps out behind it, hills culminating in the tall buildings that make up the San Francisco skyline.
 
Or theres Valencia street, the oddball mix of pirate supply shops, burger joints, bike stores, hipster coffee houses and breakfast places, alongside restaurants of every ethnicity.
 
And, of course, the city is filled with brilliant and fun people. Marxist sex columnists, investigative technology reporters, self-experimenting tenured professors, crimefighting lawyers, activist technologists, startup founders, hackers, hipsters. I could hang out with these people forever.
 
Then one morning I awoke to find three of my favorite people inviting me to find a brilliant new place in the city and be their roommate. Its a hard offer to resist, no matter the city. Its the day before I leave for my Christmas trip to Europe and I promise myself that before I go Ill see the Sunset. I finish up all my work tasks and run as fast as I can to catch the streetcar that winds its way through the city, past pastel houses on rolling hills, past video stores and laundromats, past cafes and bakeries, past offices and parks.
 
And then we hit the end of the peninsula, a road and then a hill and then a beach. And there it is, just like in LA, the sun setting right before me, casting a glow over the beach. And the fog is rolling of the hills in the nice lines that you thought only existed in heavily photoshopped pictures and you watch the waves on the beach roll up to your feet and the beauty overtakes you and you fall back against the hill and theres really only one thing you can say, even if its to no one but yourself:
 
Alright, San Francisco. I concede. You win.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February  3, 2007
 
Heh, I love that Quasi song. And youre making me nostalgic for SF.
 
posted by Daniel Jalkut
 on February  3, 2007 #
 
Finally, Aaron, you get it!
 
posted by Gabe Wachob
 on February  3, 2007 #
 
Fantastic. I know what you mean. Ive been here for 2.5 years and the energy and beauty never fades.
 
posted by Emily Chang
 on February  4, 2007 #
 
Not recognizing Quasi as the name of an artist, for a second I thought this was going to be another fiction piece! Oh my!
 
posted by David M.
 on February  4, 2007 #
 
YES! I knew youd come around. But I can understand  sometimes it takes the sunset (preceded by a mad come on, hurry up ride on the N) to finally grok SF. :-)
 
posted by alps
 on February  5, 2007 #
 
from
 
I forgot how much I hate San Francisco.
 
to
 
Alright, San Francisco. I concede. You win.
 
in 12 days.  Nice.  :)
 
Welcome to SF!
 
posted by david mathers
 on February  6, 2007 #
 
Of course youve kept hidden the Real Deal: Golden Gate Park, in fine, captures the essence.
 
Near Stow Lake are enough cosmos to occupy decades.
 
Stay a few months and Ill be down to hang.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on February  6, 2007 #
 
mathers: Those were posted out of order. I actually wrote the first in partial regret of the second.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on February  6, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: February  1, 2007
 
Title: Cambridge
 
Theres something magical about Harvard Square. Ive hardly been all over the world, but Ive been a bunch of places, and nothing can quite compare to the electricity I feel every time I visit this spot in the center of Cambridge.
 
One one side, the gates of Harvard University. On another, the campus book store. On the third, a pit where kids hang out and bands sometimes perform and street performers crowd around. On the fourth, a shopping district.
 
Cut down Dunster and you find yourself facing the Harvard Lampoon building. Follow the road a bit and youll see the mix of shops and Harvard dorms. Keep going and youll find the riverside. If its a fall day, the trees will be turning brown and the sky and river will be blow and a couple boats will be rowing down the stream and youll breathe in the air and wonder if there could ever be any paradise more perfect.
 
Across the river is the tree-lined campus of the Harvard Business School, but turn back up JFK Street and youll see hotels and shops and cafes and parks and boulevards. Everything youll ever need is there and cars and people intermingle, looking content.
 
Make a left on Brattle and follow it a ways and youll see a little dip in the street. Another singer has set up shop there and kids are sitting on the stone slab in front, listening to the songs, lying on their backs, reading books.
 
Stop into the Coop or the Harvard Bookstore and you can pick up a book of your own. Or cross the street into the famed Harvard Yard, the tree-lined quad where college students sit and run and walk. The paths meander past the dorms and classrooms, open up in parks with cafe tables where vendors sell sandwiches, close up again to head towards the library.
 
The library, the big building right in the middle, a giant edifice in praise of collected knowledge, its big stone steps streaming down as if to say you too may be elevated. Inside, the soaring archways, the countrys largest library (after the Library of Congress), the floors and floors of stacks, the underground additions, books seeping into the groundwater of the campus.
 
The knowledge infects everything. Kids in the street talk about the arrangement of bones, the politics of the economy, the topology of mathematical spaces. Even the service staff get into the act: as you sit in a cafe, the college dropout clerk argues with the immigrant cook about the political necessity of marriage and the status of its legality in various countries.
 
The seasons come here, just as you imagined: the sweltering heat of summer, the overpowering beauty of fall, the snow-capped vistas of winter, the budding excitement of spring. There is a city, an ocean, a river, a suburb, a harbor, and a bike path. There is a subway, but its not strictly necessary. The city is small enough that it can be walked across, simple enough that it can all fit in your head. Its not a place that you can soon forget.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
February  1, 2007
 
Agreed. Its been years since Ive been in Harvard Square, but it used to be one of my main stomping grounds.
 
I love the Out of Town News stand (is it still there?).
 
Weekends when all the street musicians are out in full force are also great. I used to especially enjoy this one fellow who would do little puppet shows with marionettes.
 
The little sidestreets are great too. Nothing like twisting your ankle on an uneven brick or coblestone as you trot across these old-school surfaces (and Im not being sarcastic here).
 
I just hope the gentrification and chain-ification of the Square hasnt completely ruined its unique  charms.
 
posted by Dave
 on February  1, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 31, 2007
 
Title: Stockholm
 
Visit Swedens National Gallery and youll see grand murals, elegant sculpture, classical paintings. Its exactly the kind of thing youd expect from an ornate old building across the street from the royal palace. But one floor down youll find something that seems rather out of place: an art exhibit with copyright in the title.
 
The exhibit, a brochure explains, links up with todays debate about illegal downloading of music and film files from the Internet. Itd be interesting enough if illegal downloading was such a live issue that art galleries were using it to try to get kids to come visit (can you imagine the Art Institute of Chicago promoting an exhibit by trying to claim it was related to Grand Theft Auto?) but the exhibit actually lived up to its claims: it was a penetrating investigation of what it means to be a creative artist in the age of mass production, one of the most thoughtful art exhibits Ive ever seen.
 
Copyright is still a live issue here in Sweden, perhaps best illustrated by the now world-famous The Pirate Bay website. Despite the sites arrogant name and attitude (Im running out of toilet paper, so please send lots of legal documents to our ISP, they replied to one legal complaint) what it provides is apparently quite legal in Sweden. The site is a BitTorrent tracker, helping your computer get in touch with others who are sharing (usually copyrighted) files. Because it only assists in copyright infringement and doesnt do any copyright violations itself, the Swedish government has had a hard time shutting the site down.
 
Not that they havent tried  the MPAA pushed the government into raiding and seizing all the servers of the Bay and their ISP, prq.se, including servers for websites that received special government protection as media outlets.
 
The Pirate Bay was originally a project of Piratbyrn (lit. Piracy Bureau), a Swedish activist organization created to combat Big Contents Antipiratbyrn (lit. Anti-Piracy Bureau). The organizations spokesman, Rasmus Fleischer, has become something of a household name in Sweden. Journalists now regularly call the Piratbyrn for responses to claims by the Antipiratbyrn and Fleischer regularly gives talks on the topic of piracy. When I met him he was getting ready for a Vanity Fair photo shoot the following day.
 
Random people on the street here have attended Rasmus Fleischer talks. Indeed, random people on the street here work with famous computer scientists, random people on the street use reddit, random people on the street pirate files. Stockholm has odd streets.
 
At the same time, a third organization  the Swedish Piratpartiet  is trying to change the laws through electoral mechanisms. Despite being a fairly single-issue political party, in their first election, they won .63% of the popular vote and is now bigger than the Swedish Green Party. (In school mock elections, it won a whopping 4.5%, which gives you some idea of its political base.)
 
But dividing up the parties into clearly separate organizations isnt the most sensible way of looking at it. For the most part, the organizations consist of IRC channels where friendly people sit around swapping notes and working on little projects theyre interested in. For a non-profit, such a structure sounds hideously disorganized. But its precisely how most free software projects get developed.
 
A kid drops out of school to intern with the pirates. Some filmmakers put together a documentary on the subject. Journalists file freedom of information act requests to reveal whos really behind the Pirate Bay raids. Kids post fliers for the Pirate Party. It smells like the beginnings of a movement.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 31, 2007
 
Just a clarification: Piratpartiet has more members than the Green party, but not more voters. (I think it helped that the membership fee is less than a dollar, and free if youre younger than 26.)
 
The Green party got 5.24% of the vote in the election last year and you need at least 4% to get into the Riksdag, so Piratpartiet has quite some way to go until they will be able to make a difference.
 
In some ways theyve already succeeded: most parties have reconsidered their stance on filesharing after Piratpartiet showed up in the media, some even reversing the position they took when they voted on the issue two (I think) years ago.
 
posted by false messiah
 on February  2, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 30, 2007
 
Title: Dresden
 
Hop on a train from Berlin and before you even notice your eyes have closed youll be waking up in Dresden. The streets are dark but the light pours out from bars and you make your way down a sidestreet to your quirky, beaten apartment and tumble into bed, ready to wake up and tackle the next morning.
 
And what a morning it is: the sun shines through a solid gray sky, giving everything a cast of history and emotional depth. This is how Europe was meant to look  a bridge stretches across a sweeping river to a skyline of grand and time-battered buildings. A man plays old songs on an accordion and you follow the twisting cobblestone streets through the kind of grand edifices that only kings would build.
 
Upscale shops are mixed in with the glorious old buildings, people bustle every which way, and a fantastic network of streetcars takes you wherever you wish to go. Shops and cafes open onto picturesque views of a city with more charm than you could dare to hope for.
 
The skyline is made up of churches and synagogues and government buildings and hotels and art museums and schools. The center is surrounded by districts of hip bike stores, clothing shops, restaurants. A church with the top blown off is now used for concerts and parties. Apartment buildings have been built in bomb craters.
 
There are few places that live up to the beauty of the imagination  Harvard Square exists romantically only for a few days in the fall. But here is Dresden, the picture of beauty, in the heart of Europe. The riverbank sweeps majestically and curves past you and heads off into the distance as the sun sets into its flowing waters. And then you head home.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 30, 2007
 
Ever read Slaughterhouse Five? I would love to visit Dresden one day (I was stationed in Bavaria in the 70s) and if I ever make it over there, I will.
Thanks. 
G
 
posted by G Milner
 on January 31, 2007 #
 
When I was on my quest for a place to study, my decision was against Dresden and for Munich. Which is (imho) even more beautiful. =)
 
posted by Justin
 on January 31, 2007 #
 
You can never compare Dresden with Munich, they are just too different. It is like comparing New York with London, you can not rule out one, you have to see both.
 
Yes Munich is beautiful, buts its a kind of beauty that youll find anywheree in Europa, in Vienna, Rome or Paris. Dresden has a Beauty that can be found nowhere else; the only places that come close to Dresden are the Italian cities, but even they are different, it is hard to explain.
 
Dresden is a bizarr mixture of incredible beauty  in a small city center, surrounded by ugly concrete blocks and large empty spaces in the inner city; the debris has been cleared but those sites still breath the tragedy of the largest destruction of a city in Europes History. Many sites of the former beauty survived the war, but then the Communists blew up what was left; Dresdners called this the 2nd Destruction of their City.
 
In Munich youll have a good Time. Dresden will touch your heart.
 
I am partly of Jewish origine myself, my Grandmother and my Grand Uncle, famous Author Kurt Baschwitz, survived the Holocaust. But still, it bothers me why only the crimes to one part of my family are recognized, whilst crimes to the other part are not. I love both parts of my familiy, the German Christians and the German Jewish.
 
Americans and British should become honest and start banning Bombs on innocent Civilians. It was ordinary Germans who risked (AND LOST) their lives in order to save my Grandmother. And it was Allied people, who finally betrayed them. It is high time for America and England to revise their stereotypes.
 
The truth has to be spoken, but now i wish you a good trip to Europe and please help us rebuild Dresden. Reconstruction of large parts of the historic old town is only starting now! Modernist Architects and incompetent urban city planers try to implant vile ugly blocks into the historic sites, we are the trying to prevent this. Please help us prevent Dresden from being destroyed a 3rd time.
 
This is one of Europes most beautiful cities, Dresden belongs to all of mankind, regardless of race or ethnic origine. Please help us rebuild,  i am not talking about money, i only ask you to inform yourself - in case you are interested.
 
Thank you, and all the best
 
Peter
 
www.neumarkt-dresden.de
 
posted by Peter Thelen
 on February  1, 2007 #
 
Dresden from the point of view of a nearly former citizen. One great think from the 90s a remember is the first fab from AMD, at this time a was going to school. In this past i think, i will be study physics, but later this was IT (Informatik).
Now i live near Stuttgart, but I want back to Dresden, because its my home.
 
posted by Max
 on February  7, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 30, 2007
 
Title: Berlin
 
A giant death star-like ball hovers over Berlins Alexanderplatz, a remnant of the Cold War struggle to seem powerful. Its lit from underneath, casting it an ominous glow, just the kind of comically-evil thing youd see in a bad movie.
 
Just across the way is a childlike spaceship standing in front of a glowing dome and inside  well, inside, as a person at the desk put it in their thick German accent, everything is a little bit chaos.
 
The Chaos Communications Congress has taken over the building. The dome on the top floor is filled an ongoing series of interesting talks, the lounge underneath it is filled with couches and rugs and rocking music for people to hang out, and the floor beneath that is filled with people in front of monitors watching the warm glow of computer code scroll by. The place is filled with hackers.
 
I dont particularly like computers, but theres a definite charm to these peoples cast of mind. They like to get stuff done. There are tables with soldering irons and pliers and lego blocks and cubes of blinking lights and animation software and magnifying glasses and more. One group has built little blinking tags that figure out which room youre in and report it to a central server. Another has shown everyone how to purchase VOIP phones from the electronics store across the street, hook them up to a conference network theyve built, and then return them when the conference is over. Others are showing off the stuff theyve built, from software that can let you surf the Internet completely anonymously to laptops that can be distributed to the Third World for $100 a pop.
 
For these people, theres no separation between work and fun. Its not like other conferences where you sit during the day in quiet seats taking notes on carefully preselected talks and then spend the nights out drinking with your buddies. You can spend the days drinking and the nights listening to talks, each blending into each other, with games and working and gabbing on the side. Couches next to lectures, couches in lectures, lectures from couches.
 
Even if you dont like the subject matter, you have to admire the atmosphere. What other group has a place like this, existing somewhere between occupation and hobby and subculture, between conference and convention and hangout? Its fun, its educational; its occupation, its friendship; its building, its destroying. It is, indeed, a little bit chaos.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 30, 2007
 
Something I didnt understand when I was at Wikimania: Here you have these brilliant people, theyve been talking about the most fascinating things all day long, and then, come 9:00 PM, they hit the bars and get drunk and become utterly boring. I dont understand the appeal.
 
posted by David M.
 on January 30, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 30, 2007
 
Title: Cities
 
The densest cities in America, according to the 1990 census:
 
Maybe there is something to my wanting to move to Philadelphia after all.
 
Everyones been complaining about how Im too critical, too much of a downer. Well, here you go: its the nice week. Five posts on five cities saying only nice things. Hope you enjoy it as much as I do.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 30, 2007
 
As a (west) Philadelphian, I can definitely see you fitting in here. Your interest in social activism has a natural fit here; I believe we lead the nation in number of non-profits organizations.
 
Lunch is on me if you are ever in town. (Ive used enough of your freely available software that it seems only fair.)
 
posted by Shawn Medero
 on January 30, 2007 #
 
Likewise, lunch is on me if youre ever near Portland, OR (on the other hand, I may be moving to San Mateo soon). Hope you have a nice week.
 
posted by David M.
 on January 30, 2007 #
 
Vancouver, Canada fits in at the number 3 spot currently in North America. Its a pretty awesome city too.
 
posted by Dustin
 on January 30, 2007 #
 
Another vote for Aaron moving to Philadelphia. The last thing I ever expected was to fall in love with this city, but thats exactly what happened.
 
posted by Brett
 on January 30, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 24, 2007
 
Title: Fired
 

 
Shirt courtesy Danny OBrien.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 24, 2007
 
Dude, youre young and handsome. Cut your hair and shave.
 
Nice shirt.
 
Hope everythings going to be OK with you. Any blog post about what may be next?
 
posted by David
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Put the facts together, and it becomes clear:
The USA is becoming a police state:
 
http://home.comcast.net/~plutarch/PoliceState.html
 
posted by Joe
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Funny!
 
posted by Seth Roberts
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Maybe you can write another fake suicide note and guilt them into bringing you back.
 
posted by David Slone
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Where you fired or you resigned. Common, tell us the juicy details? I knew that Aaron, the original non-conformist, wouldnt last at Wired.
 
posted by AL
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
dont cut your hair and dont shave.
 
in face, if you can grow a beard, do it.
 
posted by bill kellerman
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Or, uh do whatever you like.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Dude,
LOVE the shirt!!  Stick it to them!
 
posted by Susan
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
I warned yaa - google has connections everywhere.
 
posted by Gnonymous Coward
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
I though your previous entry said your resignation had been acceptedor were you being sarcastic?
 
Naw.
 
posted by ged
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Just. So. Wrong.
My thoughts are with you.
Uh - in a non-paranormal way, of course.
You know what I mean!
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Well, I dont know the fashion in cisco, Ill admit. Also, my comment about hoping all is going to be well, on second thought, is very silly; as Aaron is brilliant and well-connected, Im certain hell be just fine :)
 
Provided he doesnt kill himself.
 
posted by David M.
 on January 27, 2007 #
 
I love it.
 
Thanks for posting that, it made my day.
 
posted by Steven Hansen
 on January 27, 2007 #
 
Brilliant, brilliant tshirt!
 
posted by Martin DeMello
 on January 28, 2007 #
 
time for something new. start a new wave garage rock band.
 
posted by dweebcentric
 on January 29, 2007 #
 
I see reddit has dropped their alien from the logo today. I wonder if there is any significance.
 
Good luck with your post dot-com life, I think you will manage fine.
 
posted by Harald Korneliussen
 on January 29, 2007 #
 
dude, as the first commenter said, go to a hairmaker and also cut shave. ladies gonna love you.
no offence, you look like you totally neglect yourself.
 
posted by elegance
 on May  7, 2007 #
 
Lol!
 
posted by kesor
 on May 11, 2007 #
 
Sorry late comment. Just recently started reading your stuff. You dont look geeky enough in that picture by the way! I think you can do better than that. lol. Maybe you can use a pair of big glasses like Bill Gates when he was still starting out.
 
posted by Fiona
 on August 25, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 23, 2007
 
Title: The Fundamental Law of Sociology
 
There are some loons on the Internet trying to spread the idea that the fundamental law of sociology is the black-white test score gap. Put aside the fact that anyone who would even think of proposing such an absurd thing must be a raving scientific racist.
 
And put aside the fact that they must also be fairly stupid, because such a claim is, at best, a discovery about a particular society, and not a law. (Can you imagine someone claiming that falling objects accelerate at 32 feet per second per second is a fundamental law of physics?)
 
Even put aside the fact that no actual sociologist would even go near such a claim, as the fields entire purpose is to investigate social causes of such phenomena.
 
No, let us look at an actual fundamental law of sociology, the Thomas theorem. The Thomas theorem says If men define situations as real, they are real in their consequences.
 
Now think about what that means about claiming the black-white test score gap is an immutable law.
 
Extra credit: Research stereotype threat.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 23, 2007
 
Assuming all people deserve to enjoy all the benefits of their innate worth, and assuming all people deserve to enjoy all benefits of their potential
 
1) How do you best help them as an individual?
 
2) How do you best help them as a member of their social-economic group?
 
There are people who will not sign up to the simple framework outlined above for releasing positive human potential and engage in the implied consequent analysis and actions.
 
For whatever reason, they dont wish to sign up.
 
I am inclined to treat those people as brain damaged.  Speak to them slowly, make no sudden movements, place their wallets inside of their mouths lest they choke on their own tongues.
 
In other words, if I come across a socio-economist sunk into a trough of pig filth, I trod upon his head to keep my pant cuffs from becoming soiled, and continue walking along.  I dont stick around to listen to his gurglings.
 
posted by manuelg
 on January 23, 2007 #
 
Can you imagine someone claiming that falling objects accelerate at 22 feet per second is a fundamental law of physics?
 
Esp since feet per second isnt a measure of acceleration :)
 
posted by Adam Langley
 on January 23, 2007 #
 
I would have liked to ask for links to the sources - who could possibly claim anything like that, except for real racist nutters. But they dont deserve an upgrade to their page-rank by being linked from here
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
He might be talking about that Steve Sailer jackass that was harassing Malcolm Gladwell in his blog comments. Thats the only person that leaped to mind for me, although it never would have occurred to me to call Steve Sailer a sociologist. But there is a never ending supply of other racists that aaronsw might be talking about.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Is it possible this is satire?  Dont shoot; this is the first time Ive heard it and it sounds too silly to be honest.
 
posted by Anthony
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Put aside the fact that anyone who would even 
  think of proposing such an absurd thing must 
  be a raving scientific racist.
 
What would we do without people to tell us what we should and should not think of proposing?  Bravo, Aaron.
 
http://paulgraham.com/say.html
 
posted by 
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Pseudonymous statistician La Griffe du Lion invented the meme that the black-white IQ gap is the Fundamental Law of Sociology.  Heres its first appearance:
 
http://www.lagriffedulion.f2s.com/city.htm
 
Aarons criticisms are dead on, IMO - calling this the fundamental law of sociology is absurd.
 
But the pesky IQ gap is real enough.
 
posted by rps
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Reminds me of The Bell Curve
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Bell_Curve
 
posted by AL
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
2007-01-23 22:52:36 gives a classic example of what I call argumentum ad libertatem.
 
And did he just say Paul Graham? Oh, OK.
 
posted by bi
 on February  5, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 22, 2007
 
Title: Last Day of Summer Camp
 
Ten calls are coming through on my cell phone at once. I try to answer them in order. Finally I get to my mom. Just wanted to see how you are, she says. Oh, by the way, Alexis called the cops. I try to treat this as nonchalantly as she is, but mean while Im running to find my pants. I don my gray hoodie, grab my keys, lock the door behind me, and run out into the street, finally saying goodbye. I just make it  I see the cops coming in front of my door as I make it to the next block.
 
I know exactly what to do in these kinds of situations; Ive seen it in all the movies. Turn off the wireless on the cell phone, pay for everything in cash, dont use RFID cards, stick to sidestreets. I stick to sidestreets, but I still hear the cop sirens buzzing down all the major roads. There are major roads on every side of me.
 
The lady across the aisle from me on the plane is pleading with the flight attendant. She holds her small dog between her legs (oh, dont worry, she had explained, hell stop barking once we take off), covered in only a blanket. The attendant is down on his knees, trying to understand what she wants. He disappears and later I see the woman pouring a small bottle of alcohol into her drink.
 
Apparently this was a mistake. The woman starts screaming profanity, locking herself in the bathroom, running up and down the aisles. Finally, shes forcibly restrained. The pilot comes on loud over the intercom, thanks us for our patience, explains that youre not supposed to mix alcohol with certain psychoactive medications, tells us law enforcement will be meeting us at the gate.
 
Law enforcement meets us at the gate. Please remain in your seats, comes the pilots voice. Law enforcement has taken control of the air craft. No one is permitted to move until law enforcement releases its control of the air craft. Law enforcement relinquishes the air craft and as I exit I see the woman, with a couple policeman in front of her, asking her if she can see the fingers theyre holding up.
 
God, I think. Didnt I just go through this yesterday?
 
I forgot how much I hate San Francisco. The bus takes an hour to arrive, while I have to stand in the human filth of the city. For some reason they put the major bus transfer point at the same place drug dealers congregate. Its not a very fun place to wait.
 
I finally get home and tumble into the mat that makes up my bed.
 
Next thing I remember Im in the Moscone Center. MacWorld is over, but a few signs and people are still around. I look out a window for a bit and a guy taps me on the shoulder. I think theyre trying to punk Paul Graham in that room, he says, pointing. I go and see.
 
Paul Graham is indeed in that room, as is his girlfriend and my co-founders and the other Y Combinators I know and a bunch of people I dont recognize (probably this years batch of Y Combinators). They start surrounding me. I begin to suspect a trap.
 
Whats going on here? I ask Steve. Wait a second, you brought me here, didnt you? What are you talking about? Steve replies. I mean, I remember going to sleep, I remember kind of wanting to wake up, but then all of the sudden Im in the Moscone Center? How did I get here? You must have brought me here, didnt you?
 
Steve denies all knowledge, but theres a gleam in his eye.
 
The people surrounding me take a step closer.
 
Alright, I say. Ill make a deal. If I can tickle every last one of you, I go free. Otherwise, you win.
 
They seem to accept the deal.
 
I begin tickling.
 
People begin running, dodging, flying around the room. But Im like a heat-seeking missile. I track down every one of them, extend my hands out, go straight for their armpits.
 
I win.
 
I wake up on my mat. The sun is shining brightly. Its a beautiful day. I whistle a happy tune. I go to wait for the bus. One bus goes by, its too full to stop. Another comes by after what seems like an eternity. Its almost as full, but Im not going to wait for yet another. I hang from the bar overhead, just barely fitting inside. Theres no room for my feet.
 
The bus gets off a couple blocks from my office. To get there, I have to walk past the Moscone Center. Thats when it comes back to me. I look hard at the Moscone Center. Oh, I say. It must have been a dream.
 
Goooood Monday morning, I say, entering my office. Thats kind of my little thing, my little ritual. Goooood XXX morning, I say in a happy voice, replacing the XXX with the name of the day Im saying it on. I only say it once each day.
 
My co-worker is ignoring me.
 
I am presented with a letter accepting my resignation. I am told to collect my personal effects. A woman from HR politely escorts me from the premises. She never says that she is escorting me, but she does stand behind me wherever I go. I think I am supposed to leave.
 
I leave. The sun is shining brightly. Its a beautiful day.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 22, 2007
 
Is this yet another work of fiction with a main character scarcely distinguishable from yourself and/or did you actually resign?
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on January 23, 2007 #
 
http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2007/01/22/BAGMKNN6BP18.DTL
 
posted by tma
 on January 23, 2007 #
 
Tma, thats interesting that it really happended.  Maybe it wasnt just a dream :-)
 
BTW thats a really creative way to display pictures on your website.
 
posted by Greg
 on January 23, 2007 #
 
On to bigger and better things I hope.
 
posted by mako
 on January 23, 2007 #
 
So, what your next venture would be?
 
posted by Denis Krukovsky
 on January 23, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 18, 2007
 
Title: A Moment Before Dying
 
There is a moment, immediately before life becomes no longer worth living, when the world appears to slow down and all its myriad details suddenly become brightly, achingly apparent.
 
For Alex, that moment came after exactly one week of pain, seven days of searing, tormenting agony that poured forth from his belly. Alex never liked his belly. Growing up he was always fat, surrounded by a family of bellowing, rotund Americans, who had a room in their house with wall-to-wall, floor-to-ceiling cabinets, all entirely filled with bags and boxes of various pre-processed semi-organic assemblages, which they used to stuff their faces at all hours of the day.
 
Alex had body image issues. Hed avoid mirrors because he couldnt bear to look at himself, his large bulbous cheeks obscuring his fine features. He avoided photos, covering his face or ducking out of the way when the click of the camera came, for the same reason: he didnt want to be confronted with the physical evidence of his disgusting nature, thought he could not go on living if he had to face the truth.
 
It wasnt until he got away from his family that he discovered his weight was not an immutable characteristic, like the fingerprints he often mused about burning off, like the dental records which had caused him so much adolescent anguish, like the DNA hed heard so much about in school. He would take off his shirt and stare at his stomach in the full-length mirror. It was there, of course, hideous as ever, but also appreciably smaller. Its size, he realized, could change.
 
So Alex starved himself. Cut down from three meals a day to simply two and then to only one. And even that became superfluous most days. Alex simply wasnt hungry.
 
He watched his stomach dwindle, monitored his progress on the electronic readout of his at-home scale, charted the numbers on his computer, admired the plunging trendlines.
 
He was doing so well. He told all his friends. The secret to losing weight, he would explain, is simply not eating. You just get used to it after a while. He looked at the beggars outside his window and refrained from giving them change so that they too could experience this miracle. He changed the channel when the radio began speaking about starvation in Africa. Starvation isnt so bad, he scoffed. You get used to it after a while. He wondered whether the USDA thrifty food budget could be further reduced.
 
He stopped going out. His friends always wanted to meet him for meals, or for drinks, events in which Alex simply wasnt interested anymore. Before long, Alexs friends were no longer interested in him.
 
Alex started eating in cafs, ordering a small pastry, sitting in a comfortable chair, listening to the music play over the loudspeakers. Soon he stopped doing even that.
 
Alex read on the Internet about death. There was a theory, increasingly well supported, that eating is what killed you. They found that rats on extremely restricted diets, rats who ate very few calories, lived impressively long. They saw the same results with other animals, up to and including chimpanzees. They suspected, but could not prove, the same was true of humans. Every little bite of food was another step towards death.
 
Alex started eating again. His appetite grew as slowly as it had declined but within months he was back to eating three meals a day. Food suddenly gave him pleasure again. He savored the tastes on his tongue.
 
One night he and his friends decided to try a new restaurant. But when the food came, Alex couldnt eat it. He thought it smelled funny. He let it sit there, his plate lying on the table, his food seething, untouched.
 
The next night Alex couldnt sleep. Hed wake up, feeling searing pains in his stomach, as if the food winding its way through his gut had spikes and was tearing apart the walls of his intestine.
 
He suffered like this for days, rolling on the floor in agony, unable to resist eating but every bite he ate causing him unimaginable pain. And still, he could not stop.
 
Five days in, it seemed like the worst had passed. The pains came less frequently, the pains were less intense. He actually slept that night.
 
The day Alex killed himself, he was awoken by pains, worse than ever. He rolled back-and-forth in bed as the sun came up, the light streaming through the windows eliminating the chance for any further sleep. At 9, he was startled by a phone call. The pains subsided, as if quieting down to better hear what the phone might say.
 
It was his boss. He had not been to work all week. He had been fired. Alex tried to explain himself, but couldnt find the words. He hung up the phone instead.
 
The day Alex killed himself, he wandered his apartment in a daze. The light streaming through the windows gave everything a golden glow, which had the odd effect of making the filth hed become surrounded with seem cinematic.
 
Alex wanted to go outside for one last meal, but he had trouble making the appropriate connections. Jacket, shoes, pants, wallet. Each lay in a different spot upon the floor. Alex knew they went together, he drew lines connecting them in his minds eye, but it didnt see to fix anything, his eyes just kept bouncing from one item to another.
 
Finally, he summoned the intelligence to put them on. The world seemed funny afterwards. He noticed the way the key turned in the lock, like a hand rotating in front of his face, an interplay of light and shadow, objects in space. He noticed the packages sitting at his doorstep, begging him to open them, but their labels insisting that they were addressed to someone else. He noticed the frail old ladies who refused to obey the walkdont walk signs and instead walked slowly, backs hunched, across a major intersection.
 
He went to a new caf across the street, the one place he hadnt been to yet. Light streamed in through the huge picture windows, making the whole place seem bright and airy. So much light, in fact, that the outside seemed a glow, as if the caf was suspended in the middle of a powerful white light. People held lowered, indistinct conversations. People on his left, people on his right, people behind him. But one conversation seemed to be coming from the ceiling. It might have been a trick of the acoustics. He looked up and saw two speakers staring back at him and listened closely.
 
The caf was not playing music. It was playing a recording of two peoples lowered, indistinct conversation.
 
The day Alex killed himself, he had a sudden, powerful craving for a Key Lime Sugar Cookie. It was odd the power the Key Lime Sugar Cookie had over him. Alex did not particularly like limes of any sort. In fact, the idea of an actual actual, as with all fruits, thoroughly disgusted him. He hated how when he ordered sparkling water at fancy restaurants they would place a lime wedge on the top of his glass, how he had to confront the disgusting object every time he tried to take a sip, how touching the lime, even to remove it, was so digusting as to be simply out of the question.
 
And yet, here it was, this cookie, with the lime flavor baked into the center and large transparent grains of sugar embedded in the top, begging for him, begging for one last taste. The cookie was sold exclusively by a publicly-traded chain of cafs that tried hard to seem international, giving itself a foreign-sounding title and printing the names of major world cities on every door, even though it had not expanded much beyond the eastern half of the United States. Alex purchased the cookie.
 
He noticed the way he couldnt quite form the words to request it, simply presented the cookie in front of the cashier and twitched his head, assuming (correctly) that in context the request would be understood. He noticed the way his hands moved haphazardly to remove the appropriate amount of money from his wallet. He noticed the way his change spilled out onto the counter as he tried to find the quarter with which to complete the transaction. He noticed the way he wobbled as he walked as he took the now-purchased cookie outside.
 
The day Alex killed himself, he savored his one remaining cookie, the sweetness of the embedded sugar grains, the bizarre flavor of what must have been lime. He used his tongue to wipe the remaining crumbs from his teeth, tossed the now-empty bag it had come in into the trash, and stepped out into the middle of the street.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 18, 2007
 
Hey Aaron,
 
Youre scaring me here.  Please sick around and talk to us.  You can always die later.  Theres no rush.
 
If things seem bad, please try to keep in mind how things change.
 
David
 
posted by David Montgomery
 on January 18, 2007 #
 
It neednt be this way, for there is a cure: the joy of life. Sanity can be restored through attempts at music, channeling the fundamental disorder into form and elegance, focusing the energy toward good. Art, especially the art of nature, as Alexander suggested, is likely another cure.
 
Aaron Swartz
 
Thanks for a compelling piece.
 
Ryan
 
posted by Ryan
 on January 18, 2007 #
 
There is a vegan Vietnamese restaurant nearby me that also serves raw food.
 
The raw food dishes are as strange as you would expect, but not inedible.
 
I eat what my wife cooks.  Because I dont wish to be struck down by the pure wrath of an angry little lady.
 
My wife cooks meat.  I eat meat.
 
But if I was serious about losing the 60 extra pounds I have accumulated on my 61 frame, I would go the raw food route.
 
God bless America and modern agriculture and food distribution.  It allows for a raw food diet to be varied, delicious, nutritionally complete, and affordable.
 
I love meat.  Love it, love it, love it.  I would eat a baby (if properly prepared).  But if meat-eating becomes as looked-down-upon as cigarette smoking (banned it all public places in California), it would probably be a good thing for society and the planet.  And me.
 
posted by manuelg
 on January 18, 2007 #
 
Jeez, Aaron - get some help. Now. Suicides talk about it before they do it. Like Chris White, my friend who blew his brains out last winter.
 
posted by Bob
 on January 18, 2007 #
 
upvote for Bob.
 
Exercise helps a lot.  Find something that makes you happy every time.  Not the gym, but things like hiking, surfing, paddling, frisbee something.
 
posted by Keizo Gates
 on January 18, 2007 #
 
Aaron: I agree with Bob. I had a friend who killed himself and he started talking this way before he did it. Anything I can do to help out?
 
posted by Robert Scoble
 on January 18, 2007 #
 
Aaron, youre scaring me. Youre one of the most brilliant people around and you have a bright future.
 
posted by Mike Cohen
 on January 19, 2007 #
 
Hey Aaron  Im a littled worried here.  Please heed the above advice. Let me know if I can help.
 
posted by Nicole
 on January 19, 2007 #
 
Aaron, hang in there.
 
posted by Evan Hansen
 on January 19, 2007 #
 
Hey Aaron,
 
You dont know me, and I pretty much only know you through your writing.  Ive only seen you once in person, at the first startup school.  At the end of the Q&A session, you shouted out to the crowd, Quit your jobs!.  Those three words alone were enough of an inspiration to make me want to comment here and say that I think youre an ok guy and I hope you feel better soon.
 
Cheers, Bill.
 
posted by William Bland
 on January 19, 2007 #
 
Slow people with dim futures neednt off themselves either.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on January 19, 2007 #
 
I cant read the article, only the title and the comments.
If the number refers to your IC, mine is not that high and you should not complaint.
If it is refered to your weight, is not a problem either. A quick fix is to move to the metric system.
If it reffers to something else, I sincerely apologice.
Please write more often.
 
posted by Javier
 on January 23, 2007 #
 
200 is the HTTP code for OK. (i.e. Im OK, Youre OK)  Hence the first sentence of the body.
 
posted by -
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Ive read it as a little short story - and as that it is very interesting, and touching. That I ended up a bit confused about it, kind of adds to the story.
So yeah, I hope its just that. Suicide itself is really no good idea - if you dont like your life at the moment, change it. There are so many things to do - we all die soon enough anyway.
 
posted by Thomas
 on February 23, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January 10, 2007
 
Title: The Capital of Scandinavia
 
Sweden is a fascinating country, although it doesnt appear that way at first. The Stockholm airport tries hard to sell you on the citys importance, lining the walls with the faces of famous residents, none of whom I recognize. Stockholm is The Capital of Scandinavia, at least according to the wall, the information desk, and the You Are Here signs spread around the city. All the signs are in English as well as Swedish and we didnt see a single person the entire trip who couldnt speak English (although one declined to).
 
Nor does the ride from the airport suggest anything special  the road is lined with the office parks of big companies, much like the streets of Silicon Valley. And the city seems, well, like a city, at least until you realize thats your apartment, not simply downtown.
 
Most American cities are still suffering from the urban planning designed to keep non-existent factory fumes away from peoples homes. Even in San Francisco, where all sorts of crazy things are crammed into one small peninsula, there is still a clear separation of residence and business  blocks of victorian row houses, then a cross street with a bunch of shops.
 
But as far as I could tell, Stockholm doesnt have any such residential zones. All the apartments seemed to be on the floor above the normal street life; the two deeply intertwingled; just the way I like it. (See The Death and Life of Great American Cities for more reasons.)
 
The apartments  all the apartments  are rent controlled, one of the socialist remnants in Swedens social democracy. In practice, this leads to some odd results. No one ever gives up an apartment, so tenants feel safe installing nameplates on their doors. Instead of giving up the place, they give it to their family, their friends, or let their children inherit it. Once you have an apartment contract, you can swap it with anyone elses (and there are web sites to help you do this), but to get one you need to add your name to a list when you turn 18, and then wait for ten to twenty years for an apartment to open up. Those with money but not that kind of time instead pay under the table for a contract.
 
There are no homeless people in Stockholm, but one person I spoke to claimed that this was because the homeless didnt know anyone with a rent contract, so they all stayed in the suburbs, which they were more familiar with anyway, and as a result there ended up being about as many homeless per capita as in a the average American city.
 
Backlash politics is incredibly popular in the US, where theres not that much to backlash against, but its even more popular in Sweden, where theres some justification. US-style libertarians are everywhere, this time with some actual justification for their persecution complexes. Although not much. A new conservative government has recently taken power and has pulled all the libertarians out to fill up the political positions.
 
Our roommate just happened to hang out with libertarians in college; now all her friends are top officials in the government. A smaller country, it starts to seem like everyone knows everybody here (I suppose they all went to college together).
 
Of course, there are still outsiders. The country has private email mailing lists on which all the gossip about how the county is actually run (and who the royalty is actually screwing) is shared among the prominent journalists and other figures. (There are similar secret lists in other fields, including one for the left-wing of the US Democratic Party.) Journalists know that sharing that kind of information with the public simply isnt done and those who violate the rules are unceremoniously kicked off. Occasionally a young reporter uses their column to complain theyre not on the list, but the people in the know just laugh at them.
 
Its the same kind of laugh you imagine Swedens IKEA founders having as you marvel at their clever tax-dodging schemes. IKEA, the famed Swedish interior design chain now sweeping the US, is owned by a company called Ingka Holding, which is actually owned by a tax-exempt not-for-profit  the worlds largest, even larger than the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. (Not that selling interior furnishings is at all comparable to curing Malaria.) The not-for-profit channels its funds to a Dutch foundation which is operated by a Swiss lawyer friend but shares some of its assets with another Dutch company which is owned by a Luxembourg holding company which is owned by a company in the Netherlands which is run by a trust in the Carribean. You can probably guess where the tax-free money goes from there.
 
IKEA is everywhere in Sweden. Their couches fill the tiny rent-controlled apartments, their chairs are found in everyones offices, and when you finish your drink the light shining through the bottom of the glass illuminates the word: IKEA.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January 10, 2007
 
Interesting piece as usual, although saying that there are no homeless people in Stockholm is a bit weird depending on your definition of suburbs. I see at least two or three of them each week, by just passing through the city by commuter train and metro as part of my daily commute. Maybe youve even heard of the magazine Situation Stockholm, sold by rehabilitating drug addicts (its not a 1:1 relationship between drug addicts and homeless but theres a lot of overlap).
 
Itll be fun to hear further reflections about what Swedens like. Living as I do (as we all do to a point these days) online and being so calibrated to the US viewpoint its fun to get someone elses perspective on your own country for once.
 
posted by Jesper
 on January 11, 2007 #
 
Its a lot harder to be homeless in places where you can freeze to death outside in the wintertime.
 
posted by Dustin
 on January 11, 2007 #
 
Please check any reliable Gini list to compare social inequalities between Sweeden and (for example) your country (and its malaria fundations).
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_countries_by_income_equality&diff=75005663&oldid=74841387
 
posted by 
 on January 11, 2007 #
 
Airports certainly says a lot about the culture of a country, they dont even have to try.
 
posted by Gustaf
 on January 11, 2007 #
 
I agree with Jesper - there are homeless people in Stockholm, although I expect that most of them sleep in shelters, caravans, storage rooms and the like, rather than out in the streets. They can usually be found outside the underground stations or in the parks.
 
In central Stockholm I agree about apartments and other areas being intermingled, but thats mostly in the areas that were built before the 1950s. Theres no shortage of project housing (constructed during the miljonprogram years) 20-30 minutes away from the city centre, built with the ideal of separating living, work and shopping.
 
I also think youre overstating how the housing market works. Its a mixture between regulations and a free market - if you have money you can buy an apartment straight away.
 
You only have to wait in the apartment queue if you 1) dont want to or cant afford to purchase an apartment, or 2) want a cheap apartment in central Stockholm. You can get a nice apartment in a reasonable location after 12 months, and there are apartments you can get straight away. (For instance: a 2-room 59m2 apartment in Skarpnck, 5000SEK(~720USD)/month is available right now.)
 
Im not saying that the apartment market is perfect, only that it isnt as bad as some people claim, and not as regulated either. The nameplate thing is probably cultural - after all it only takes 5 minutes to put it up or remove it.
 
Getting your perspective on Stockholm and Sweden is interesting, although you should be aware that its a bit like someone visiting central SF and drawing conclusions about politics, housing, etc - not necessarily wrong, but not necessarily the whole picture either.
 
posted by false messiah
 on January 11, 2007 #
 
I wonder what IKEAs tax burden would be if they didnt engage in that dodge of theirs.
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on January 15, 2007 #
 
its a matter of rather insanity that we have extremes on both side on this issue.
 
tax rate can go up to 70, 80% or even more, 
(In many places including USA): and no major revolt.
 
and then we get those neutrality autonomous super-national law and super-international zone, tax haven spots all over the world, and practices to use them.
 
and we still believe we understand how we live, and have scientific discipine called
economics.
 
posted by our brains are so so thing
 on January 15, 2007 #
 
Sweden is not socialist, nor is any other country in Western Europe. Read up on Socialism on Wikipedia. Socialism is basically a dictatorship under an equalitarian guise and not much different from communism. Sweden and other European countries basically have a free market economy with some exceptions thrown in to mitigate the worst effects of free markets. Calling European countries socialist is unfortunately also typical of Americans that harbor fears of anything left of the Democrats.
 
posted by Hendrik
 on January 18, 2007 #
 
The housing market is indeed rather dysfunctional in that a flat in central Stockholm can be cheaper than one in the outer suburbs (by law!) but there are lots of condominium-type apartments that are wholly priced by the market. Thus expensive.
 
Also socialism is pushing it when describing Sweden, but the views on equality etc. differ so much from mainstream American views that the difference is felt to be larger than it actually is. For example, in Sweden you can lose an election for promising to lower taxes.
 
In cultural matters (music, movies, food) the American influence is greater than, in my opinion, the European. No-one can read French or German, but most can get by in English.
 
posted by Gustaf Erikson
 on January 21, 2007 #
 
Everybody knows everybody in Sweden? For gods sake, there are nine million people living there, more than in New York City (excluding suburbs). Does everybody know everybody in New York? Did they all go to the same college? Jesus Christ.
 
posted by Tomas Jogin
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
Next time youre in the area you might want to try Copenhagen - its a lot more fun than stuffy Stockholm.
 
posted by Peter
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
I dont believe there are many libertarians in Sweden in the US sense. Oh, there are some pro-drugs people, but pro-gun, taxation-is-theft, Ayn-Rand-is-God people are practically non-existent here in Norway (cant see why Sweden should be different). Bloggers are another case, because they/we read so much US news that we tend to think in US terms and political categories. But they are a vanishingly small minority. I doubt youd find one scandinavian in 300 who has heard about Ayn Rand.
 
Homeless people in Oslo are offered places to move in to. Some still refuse, for various reasons. Perhaps its too far to get drugs, perhaps its because it doesnt make much difference to them - often they are so unable to take care of themselves that they cant keep an apartement habitable.
 
Most American cities are still suffering from the urban planning designed to keep non-existent factory fumes away from peoples homes. You are born after the clean air act in the US, which mandated scrubbing out the worst of the soot, arent you?
 
posted by Harald Korneliussen
 on January 26, 2007 #
 
Maybe there ar few homeless people in Sweden but I have never come across a more odd nation. People dont talk to each other. they dont get married. 60% of the people in Stockholm remain single. A perfect vacation for a Swede is to sit all alone in a deep forest knowing nobody is neraer than 16 miles away. I have been to most countries all over the world. Scandinavians are the oddest particularly the swedes. I was happy when I reached the German border again and will never set foot on any Scandi nations again
Mannin Sellam 
Lebanon
 
posted by Mannin Sellam
 on May 29, 2007 #
 
I dont know much about Sweden but I know the place is more or less a glaciar. According to a friend of mine Swedes often cross the Russian border and make life a hell for the Russians, They try to sell ice to rich Russians but never make it.
Hopefully EU could help them by giving some kind of Afirmative benefit actions.
Muztapha Hamzi
Turkey
 
posted by Muztapha Hamzi
 on May 29, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January  2, 2007
 
Title: Happy New Year
 
Nobody seems to have noticed, but over the past couple months, this blog has been publishing a record post a day. Every weekday  plus, starting a little later, a bonus post on sundays  Ive written an entirely new essay. Ive done this while traveling, while celebrating holidays, while galavanting around the world, while sleeping on the couches of published authors. Ive even written and posted whole pieces using the SSH feature on my cell phone.
 
I dont know anyone else who has done this. There are columnists who write for the paper, but they only have to post a couple times a week. And there are bloggers who post many times a day, but they mostly post links and commentary, not whole essays. As far as I know, Im alone in this bizarre pursuit.
 
It was a fun experiment but it was also a lot of work. I still have lots to say, but Im not sure that forcing myself to say it every day is quite so healthy. I want to work on writing better, not just faster. I wrote most of the blog posts in about an hour and while theyre decent for something written at that rate, they can rarely be called great.
 
So I think its time to slow down, work more on crafting my prose, maybe write for magazines and other outlets. (If someone out there wants to publish me, drop me a line!) This will probably hurt my readership, but running this blog has always been a weird and random occupation, done more for me than for page views.
 
So I guess thats goodbye for now and thanks for stopping by. If this piece gets posted when its supposed to, its New Years Day and Ive still got a couple more weeks of winter break to spend world-travelling. So expect some silence until I get back. Au revoir!
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  2, 2007
 
Happy New Year and enjoy your travels!
 
posted by Beatrice M
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
Happy New Year. Thanks for your thoughts, they were always interesting
 
If you do get published somewhere else, please post it on here, too :)
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
Youve written essays while sleeping? Actually, that explains a lot.
 
posted by Ged
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
And you were even able to be a cofounder of reddit all the while?  Impressive.
 
posted by concerned
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
I noticed thatfor several months, cause I have been only reading your blog veryday for several months.
 
posted by count0
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
Could have been named Jerry Roll or something[This blog].
 
If you wanted to experiment with some raw thought thing with people - that could have been done too. But you seemignly chose to stick with very classic (and say muscline?) way of deciding whats writing is.
 
So that kind of comes across. You are talking of some quite defenseless or exposing stuff - well thats not bad thing, esp if you havent go through school days with many or even some close, reliable friends, talking over one subject  over years. But its written down, and with Times font face - and your tone is rather sober or classroom debating match.
 
Jerry wont fit in the envelop. Jerry has to be shared casually and so on. We all could have been defenseless, exposing but trying to be creative and free. Not stuck in straight jacket mode.
 
But that kinda thing - may take a while to show up on the net.
 
posted by Pastries in Europe
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
Thanks to the beauty of RSS, theres no reason to lose readership just because youre no longer the Daily ASW.
 
Feeding the beast is exhausting, and one of the major problems with the blogging medium is that no one reads the archives.
 
posted by engtech
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
this is a bad news to me. am addicted to ur thoughts. anyway happy new year asw .
 
posted by ravishankarbn
 on January  5, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: January  2, 2007
 
Title: The Sociologists Creed
 
Men make their own history, but they do not make it as they please; they do not make it under self-selected circumstances, but under circumstances existing already, given and transmitted from the past. The tradition of all dead generations weighs like a nightmare on the brains of the living.
 
(Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
January  2, 2007
 
A nice good bye, this one.
Happy new year!
It was a pleasure to read your posts.
 
A sociology prof from Budapest, Hungary
 
posted by Lszl Lakatos
 on January  3, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 29, 2006
 
Title: Products That Should Exist
 
A free Gmail clone. A lot of people I know use Gmail for email. Its not because they dont have access to servers or cant afford a couple gigabytes of disk space. Its because Gmail is simply the best interface for email out there right now. Itd be even better if it was free software, though.
 
The biggest problem with Gmail is that you cant run it offline. But if it was free software, you could run it on your local machine and use it even when not connected to the net. This would also have the nice benefit of making it much faster for the user. Some synchronization code would be necessary, but itd be worth it.
 
Gmail isnt all that complicated; this really shouldnt be that hard.
 
A nice OS X Tor interface. Ive talked to a bunch of people who would like to use Tor, but find it just too complicated. Ideally, the interface should be very simple. You download the Tor binary and double-click it to start using Tor and quit out to stop. And so that you know its working, itll have a little window that will show you the names of servers youre connected to.
 
OS X has APIs for changing the system preferences; just use those to set the SOCKS server properly. Tor has APIs for finding out when you connect to a server, use those to set the display. For a decent Mac programmer, this cant be more than a days worth of work, but itd make Tor vastly more usable.
 
Decent backup software. Ive already written about this. It still hasnt happened.
 
If anyones interested in building any of these, let me know and perhaps we can work something out.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 29, 2006
 
It depends on which aspects of gmail you are interested in. Depending on that you might be looking for roundcube or zoe.
http://www.roundcube.net/
http://zoe.nu/itstories/home.php?data=stories
 
posted by Sencer
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Your second idea exists, although I agree a better product can be made.
 
http://vidalia-project.net/screenshots.php
 
posted by jj
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
An important part of Gmail is the server farm on which its running. Thunderbird, the default free software mail client, coupled with an IMAP server, provides most of the features the people like in Gmail (though admittedly not the user interface). Still, on my powerful desktop machine its barely usable, with the amounts of mail Im dealing with, and I had to make a pragmatic choice to forward everything to Gmail. Most of the things folks like about Gmail are not easy to reproduce as client software - its stuff like the excellent (collective) spam filtering, the reliability of the service, the integration with Googles other web services. The user interface is just a nice added bonus. Still it really is a shame that Gmail is not free software, and making a free clone might convince Google to release their code (in the same way the projects like Harmony convinced Sun to release the Java sources code).
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Backup software should be invisible. You should never have to think about it - it should just work. Time Machine in Leopard may be what youre looking for. Leopard also has ZFS, which maintains snapshots and can revert to previous versions.
 
Right now I use Deja Vu, which runs in the background and automatically backs up my home folder to my Linux server every night.
 
posted by Mike Cohen
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
For the last goddamn time, Leopard does not have any ZFS support. It is not there in the latest developer seeds. The disk utility screenshots are either fake or internal. I talked to Apples Developer Relations crew, and they said that the entirety of the ZFS rumor comes from one guy who works at Apple that posted to the ZFS mailing list to see if people might be interested.
 
There is nobody at Apple working on it for 10.5.0. Time Machine has nothing to do with ZFS  it uses a new HFS+ feature for hard linking to directories, thats it.
 
Seamless backup will likely never be a solved problem. ZFS goes a long way towards getting us there, but it is not magic. Dont treat it as such.
 
posted by Fred
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
I certainly dont see the UI as a nice added bonus. Its definitely not reliable and doesnt integrate well at all with the other services.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
jj: Vidalia does not do any of those things.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Aaron: it sure does, you just dont know how to use it.. try again and youll see.
 
posted by jj
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
I certainly dont see the UI as a nice added bonus
 
The gmail UI is good, but you could think of so many better UI solutions for an email client.
 
Its definitely not reliable
 
Its not as a reliable as you would expect from a rich company like Google. Its much more reliable than what I can afford to maintain (and Im a relatively advanced user - most users can afford much less than that).
 
and doesnt integrate well at all with the other services
 
It integrates much better than any other option. Jabber is built in and you can search your chat history using the same interface. You can open attachments using Writely. You get notifications directly to your personal portal, including to the mobile phone version. I think theres more.
 
My point is, the reason people use Gmail is not because they are unable to run the same software locally. If your proposed compatible clone will be able to back to Gmail by default Id probably use it, though - it would be nice to run my own client and be able to extend it, but still use Gmail when I dont have access to my customized version.
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
I dont know what you use Tor for, but theres always FoxyProxy for using Tor while browsing.  Its a Firefox extension with zero-configuration Tor usage.  Pretty nifty.
 
posted by Avinash
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
You can think of them but nobodys implemented them decently. My own email certainly has had far better uptime than my Gmail.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Gmail isnt all that complicated; this really shouldnt be that hard.
 
careful there, Ive heard clients say that one before. Simple UI != Easy App to Clone.
 
posted by Sam
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
To again deploy the aphorism I completely stand by, Gmail is fine for amateurs and top-posters (almost the same people), but not very useful for anyone else. Eudora does a million things Gmail doesnt.
 
posted by Joe Clark
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
My backup isnt fully automated, but thats fine for me because I have to plug in the disks anyways. But it is incremental, quickly restorable, and keeps all Mac metadata (supposedly; it keeps all the  metadata Ive found or been able to conjure up).
 
What I do is this: I use SuperDuper to clone my laptops drive to a NAS, which also contains a bunch of files that arent on the internal drive. Then, I use rdiff-backup to incrementally backup the NAS to a USB disk.
 
The advantages of doing this instead of just rdiff-backuping my internal drive are that rdiff-backup misses a lot of Mac metadata, first, and second, it becomes ludicrously slow for lots of small files. rdiff-backup is much happier finding diffs in a huge disk image file than it is comparing thousands of one-block files. Furthermore, I have a disk image that I can easily restore and boot from using ASR.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Aaron: What email setup do you have that is so reliable? Another thing I would like to know your secrets about :) Back before webmail got real, I had a debian box behind the sofa. But the mail software wedged itself on a bi-monthly basis and I had to use voodoo to make it work again.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
David: Using rdiff-backup on disk images sounds like a genius idea! That way I can keep more than a few dated copies of backups.
 
Ive long given up on fully avoiding top-posting. The noobs get confused, and so does the threading in many email clients. I just end up trimming the bulk of the bottom-quoted materiel. I manage to live with myself.
 
posted by Fred
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Kelllan wrote about the GMail part of this more than a year ago: http://www.laughingmeme.org/articles/2005/09/07/gmail-like-open-source-imap-client
 
You might want to send him an email. Perhaps hes found something.
 
Synchronization code exists. You could do it over IMAP or just use OfflineIMAP or one of the other pieces of software with very similar functionality.
 
posted by mako
 on December 30, 2006 #
 
Its not quite there yet, but have you looked at Zimbra as a gmail clone? Its open source
 
Its basically a imap mail server using postfix and mysql, but with calendaring and contacts built in and a nice ajax web client.
 
http://www.zimbra.com
 
posted by Norman
 on December 30, 2006 #
 
Aaron, in regard to a seamless backup system, it there anything particularly wrong with using cron and a revision control system like darcs?
 
posted by eric leons
 on December 31, 2006 #
 
Hey, What happened to your post about googles infantile tactics ? Seems to have dissapeared !
 
posted by Anonymous Howard
 on January  1, 2007 #
 
http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googlife
 
posted by It's still there and continuing 
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
Fred: You are wrong.  The DTS people are out of the loop and the latest Leopard seeds have ZFS support.
 
posted by itistoday
 on January  5, 2007 #
 
Ive been waiting for decent backup software as well.  Hopefully Googles GDrive, if and when it is released, will realize that hope of decent backup software.
 
posted by ryan
 on January  9, 2007 #
 
Sam is right.
 
As a developer (not the founder) of another webmail 2.0 app (for small businesses)  Mailroom  I can confirm that building an ajax-based email client is no simple task.
 
Building one well, thats darn-near an impossible task.
 
Also  dont look to open source for bleeding edge UI and simplicity design.  Youre much more likely to find quick hacks and poorly done UIs from the open-source world, as Im sure you well know.
 
posted by Shanti Braford
 on January 10, 2007 #
 
Brad Fitzpatrick, the livejournal guy, is working on a good backup tool called Brackup.
 
http://brad.livejournal.com/tag/brackup
 
posted by jay
 on January 13, 2007 #
 
Im with you on all three fronts, particularly gmail.  It would be wonderful to be able to run it out of a browser locally and maybe store the data in some kind of sqlite thing.  Anyone contact you on this?
 
posted by Dan Steingart
 on January 15, 2007 #
 
Its not Tor, but there is a HamachiX:
 
http://hamachix.spaceants.net/
 
posted by david mathers
 on January 15, 2007 #
 
I have 50 gmail invites left so anyone who wants an account email me at zdav27@gmail.com also follow the link below and join up
http://www.cherrytap.com/join.php?friend=583974
 
posted by 
 on January 19, 2007 #
 
Im working on a text-based MUA that steals many GMail features: sup.rubyforge.org.
 
posted by William
 on January 25, 2007 #
 
mozy(.com) works how you describe your lazy backup. The first 2GB is free, unlimited for $5. sits in the background uploading to an encrypted server (you can supply your own key if you want).
 
posted by Sander
 on January 28, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 28, 2006
 
Title: Causes of Conformance
 
Institutions require people to do their bidding. A tobacco company must find people willing to get kids addicted to cigarettes, a school must find teachers willing to repeat the same things that they were taught, a government must find public servants willing to enforce the law.
 
Part of this is simply necessity. To survive, people need money; to get money, people need a job; to get a job, people need to find an existing institution. But the people in these positions dont usually see themselves as mercenaries, doing the smallest amount to avoid getting fired while retaining their own value system. Instead, they adopt the value system of the institution, pushing it even when its not necessary for their own survival. What explains this pattern of conformance?
 
The most common explanation is an active process of beating people in: politicians get paid campaign contributions (legalized bribes) to meet the needs of the wealthy, employees get bonuses and penalties for meeting the needs of their employers, kids get threatened with time-outs and bad grades if they dont follow the demands of their teachers. In each case, the people are forced through a series of carrots and sticks to learn the values of the people in charge.
 
This is a fairly blatant form of conformance, but I suspect its by far the least effective. Studies on punishment and rewards show that dealing them out lessens the victims identification with the enforcer. Hitting me every time I dont do my job right may teach me how to do my job, but its not going to make me particularly excited about it.
 
Indeed, punishments and rewards interfere with a much more significant effect: cognitive dissonance. Cognitive dissonance studies have found that simply by getting you to do something, you can be persuaded to agree with it. In a classic study, students asked to write an essay in favor of a certain position were found to agree more with the position than students who could write for either position. Similarly, people who pay more to eat a certain food claim to like it more than people who pay less.
 
The basic theory is that people work to lessen the disagreement between their beliefs and their actions and in most cases its simply easier to change your beliefs. Quitting your job for the government is tough and painful; and who knows if youll soon find another? So its much easier to simply persuade yourself that you agree with the government, that youre doing the right and noble thing, that your work to earn a paycheck is really a service to mankind.
 
Of course, it also helps that everyone youre surrounded by feels the same way. Culture is another important influence on our beliefs. Another raft of social psychology studies find that people are willing to deny even obvious truths to fit in with a group. In the famous Asch studies on conformance, a group of confederates were seated around a table, with the subject of the experiment on the end. Everyone at the table was given a sheet with three lines, one obviously longer than the other, and then was asked to name the two lines of identical length. All of the confederates gave an obviously wrong answer and by the time the question got to the guy at the end, he ended up conforming and giving the wrong answer as well.
 
Similarly, spend your days in government offices where people simply take it for granted that theyre doing the right thing, and youre likely to pick up that tacit assumption yourself. Such ideas are not only frequently stated, theyre often the very foundation of the discussion. And foundational ideas are particularly hard to question, particularly because theyre so taken for granted.
 
But perhaps the most important effect for conformance is simply selection. Imagine that nobody was corruptible, that all the carrots and sticks in the world couldnt get someone to do something they thought morally wrong, that they stood fast in the face of cognitive dissonance, and that their moral fiber was so strong that they were able to resist a less conscientious culture. Even then, it wouldnt make much difference. As long as there was enough variety in people and their moral values, all an organization would need to do is simply fire (or fail to promote) everyone who didnt play their game.
 
Everyone knows you climb the corporate ladder by being a team player. Those who make a fuss or dont quite live up to expectations simply get passed over for a promotion. The result is simply that  without any explicit pressure at all  the people in positions of power happen to be the ones who identify with the organizations aims.
 
Its easy to look at the rather more flashy pieces of punishing people for failing to follow orders or living in a culture of conformity. But for those who want obedient employees, sometimes the most effective technique is simply failing to say yes.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 28, 2006
 
[S]ometimes the most effective technique is simply failing to say yes.
 
Indeed. This is organisational Darwinism. As Kevin Kelly wrote in Out of Control: The Biology of Machines (1994), we can think of random mutation as an author who only knows the concept Maybe? and natural selection as an editor who only knows the word No.
 
posted by Michael Bywater
 on December 28, 2006 #
 
Institutions take on a life of their own, then, eh? If the CEO of Exxon/Mobil were to object to his job on moral grounds, he would quickly be replaced with someone who doesnt. Is he, then, morally responsible for any evils his company does? What about the lobbyist he hires that is just as easily replaced? The senator? The weapons manufacturer?
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on December 28, 2006 #
 
I dont think that gets him off the hook. If I told you that you should kill your mother or I will, does that make it OK to kill your mother?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Killing my mother, no.
 
But its not a black/white situation, as we see in practice - replace killing with maximizing profits, possibly affecting and your mother with third-world poor people that look different, and or I will with or your competitor will, wholl then get that $3 million bonus instead of you - and youll see a lot of intelligent people changing their minds.
 
If you also consider the systems in place that entice corporate executives by the methods you mentioned (approval of their golfing buddies, fancy stockholder meetings, etc.), then their actions become at least understandable, if not morally justified.
 
Morality is hard to talk about, though, since free will is probably an illusion.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
But for those who want obedient employees, sometimes the most effective technique is simply failing to say yes.
 
I find that statement interesting in view of this post http://dirtsimple.org/2006/12/real-reasons-there-are-few-women-in-it.html which says that the best way to get more women in IT is to not say yes to assholes (specifically when hiring, but I suspect in general).
 
posted by James
 on December 30, 2006 #
 
If I read you correctly, Id like to point out that cognitive dissonance is not a disagreement between beliefs and actions, but disagreement between sets of cognitions. These cognitions can be beliefs or they can be perceptions of ones actions.
 
One example that always reminds me of the power of it is the group that Leon Festinger infltrated in the 1950s led by Marion Keech ( see also: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leon_Festinger )
 
There, the set of cognitions (that a spaceship sent from God would come to take them away from the evil world and that the collective actions of the group were correct) conflicted with the reality of the situation (no spaceship came). They had to construct new cognition that would rest the dissonance without destroying their old cognitions (that God respected their actions so much, they spared the whole planet).
 
posted by Steve Pomeroy
 on January  3, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 28, 2006
 
Title: Welcome to the Panopticon
 
Your picture is going to be on the front door of Wired News, Quinn told me. Thats almost like being a journalist, I replied. No, she explained. The thing about being a journalist is that its never about you. Youre like the person sitting next to the journalist. Funny that, I replied, because thats exactly what I am.
 
This years Chaos Communication Congress opens with a unique opportunity  your chance to track the movements of a Wired News reporter on the scene, as well as nearly a thousand other visitors to the annual hacker convention.
 
[]
 
track Quinn Norton (ID 254135) and Wired Digitals Aaron Swartz (ID 254260), two of nearly 1,000 participants wearing RFID trackers for the duration of the congress.
 
(Quinn Norton, Hacker Con Submits to Spychips, Wired News, December 28, 2006)
 
Its funny, I noted. The first time my employers find out where I am this week may be when they report it on their own news site.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 28, 2006
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 27, 2006
 
Title: Wither the Two Cultures?
 
Nearly fifty years ago C. P. Snow delivered his famous Two Cultures lecture, deploring the state of affairs in which the humanities, especially those who believed in constructionism, had intellectually diverged from the sciences. Scientists didnt care about Shakespeare; while literists bragged about not knowing any math.
 
But pick up a modern popular novel and its hard to see this criticism holding much weight. All the literary outlets have been touting Thomas Pynchons new tome, Against the Day. Pynchons novels, as eminent literist Scott McLemee put it, discuss the domains of information theory, mathematical physics, cosmology with frequent references to such subjects as William Hamiltons quaternions or Georg Riemanns zeta function in which the Michelson-Morley experiment takes center stage.
 
Its hard to imagine anything but a new Richard Feynman book could do more to warm a scientists heart.
 
Meanwhile, take Jonathan Franzens bestseller, The Corrections (even an Oprahs book club pick!). The book, which revolves around the dot-com economic upturn, not only features frequent and detailed references to eigenvector-based computer algorithms, advances in neurological technology, and odd properties of electrophoresis, but even features a main character who goes from being in that most constructivist of professions  left-wing literary criticism  to a job building dot-com websites.
 
It seems geekiness has gone mainstream. And along with it, the geeky culture of scientism now buts up against the aesthete culture of literism. Its hard to see how anyone can take the two cultures complaints seriously anymore.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 27, 2006
 
This was probably bound to happen at sometime. Many recent bestsellers pride themselves on intense research and knowledge of the particular domain. You find jargon, technical words, and theories thrown all over the place. The reader is suitably impressed.
 
A word of caution using another example: I (and many other TV watchers) see medical shows (like Grays Anatomy) where we cannot half understand the terminology (medical terms) used. But the context of what is happening and the emotional tone keeps me engrossed. Could that be what is happening with these kind of books?
 
posted by Krishna Kumar
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
Vladimir Nabokov, the novelist and entomologist, agreed with you forty years ago. He told an interviewer: I might have compared  myself  to  a  Colossus  of  Rhodes bestriding  the gulf between the thermodynamics of Snow and the Laurentomania of Leavis, had that gulf not been a  mere  dimple
of  a  ditch  that  a  small  frog  could straddle.
 
The whole interview:
http://www.kulichki.com/moshkow/NABOKOW/Inter06.txt
 
posted by Seth Roberts
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
A better test than a couple of carefully chosen works of fiction is universities. I happened to be one of the few people who has always been interested in both cultures, and took courses in university from both sides of the divide, and I can assure you that the humanities professors (and students) are for the most part completely ignorant of the sciences and mathematics  and do indeed wear their ignorance as a badge of pride  and the professors and students in the sciences are for the most part equally ignorant of the humanities, literature, etc.
 
There are always some exceptions, of course. I had a few science professors who were polymaths of sorts, and I had one polymath humanities professor who was scientifically literate and interest, but these were exceptions that emphasized the continuing relevance of Snows critique.
 
Id submit that universities  professors and their students  are far better places to look for evidence than works of fiction. Even in Snows day, there were works of fiction and people who spanned both sides of the divide (e.g., Charles Lutwidge Dodgson, aka Lewis Carroll), but Snow looked among his colleagues at Cambridge and saw that the great divide was for the most part the rule rather than the exception.
 
posted by Gill Bates
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
I think youre mistaking the use of technobabble for scientific interest.
 
Like Ron Moore talking about Star Trek scripts:
 
I think Im probably proudest of the lines that people would just laugh at because they would publish them as literally, Captain, the TECH is TECHing. Well, TECH the TECH, would be the answer. People would read this and go what, are you kidding? Id promise, in the second draft Ill fix all of that stuff.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on December 28, 2006 #
 
Although the cross-pollination of the left-brained and right-brained is on the rise again, do not be blinded by the trees.
 
The one thing we havent paid much attention to is the anti-intellectualism which appears to be gaining ground.  What does it matter if a large number of people refuse to think carefully at all?
 
posted by Simon Law
 on December 28, 2006 #
 
Fast forward to the day when the distinction between writing a novel and programming a propaganda script vanishes.  After all, its all about the code  the surviving meme  the surviving DNA  is it not?  That people and their institutions are not automatons is true, only if you do not pan out far enough to where the important statical correlations obtain.  Take for example,  Mr President, to surge or not to surge.  As an automaton, you will surge  you will secure and hold Baghdad*  it is the only way forward consistent with your prior rhetoric of victory and the industrial imperative to finish constructing your enemy    you must do it!  That is the command of the script.  Sorry, the script  does not sanction the occasional courageous break from the weighty baggage of a long career.  Sorry, such a rare and unexpected event, however dramatic, however life saving, however just  does not appear anywhere in the script.
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on December 28, 2006 #
 
So, is this a clever pun, or did you misspell whither?
 
posted by Evan Prodromou
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 27, 2006
 
Title: Cultural Imperialism Sucks: a visit to Berlin
 
After I exited the plane, it took me several minutes before I realized I
was in Germany. After all, the airport was designed with the same basic
concepts, the people all looked fairly normal, and all the
advertisements were all identical to their counterparts in the US.
 
Once we left the airport and begun wandering around Berlin, things
didnt get much better. There was a Dunkin Donuts and a Burger King, a
Pizza Hut and a T-Mobile store (called T-Punkt in some weird homage to
Ashton Kutcher), ads for Coca-Cola and even a The Body Shop. (A major
shopping mall was run by Sony; just like in old SF.) The streets looked
roughly similar, the cars had the same manufacturers, the buildings had
the same basic styles.
 
The similarity plays tricks on you. It not only took me a while to
realize I was in Germany, it was a while before I realized this was the
former home of the Nazis. (I was trying to think where Id heard of the
Reichstag before) When I exclaimed my discovery, apparently the older
people on the bus turned to look at me. One wonders how much of their
fitting in is an attempt to forget their different past.
 
There were still differences, of course. In America, if someone knocked
you out and took you on a plane to some random city in the country, you
probably wouldnt notice except for the fact that the street signs might
have changed color. Aside from that tiny bit of individuality, cities in
America are almost literally indistinguishable, down to the streets and
landscaping. Germany isnt that bad.
 
The most obvious is that they get to keep speaking their quirky little
language, although only speaking English here gets you pretty far. On
the other hand, their currencyand presumably their governmenthas
been integrated into the EU. But the biggest thing you notice is that
the city is simply more elegant. The cars are smaller, the public
transit far superior, and the font on the street signs to die for. But
if london had EU currency, Im not sure itd be all that
distinguishable.
 
There is a blatant taste for modernist architecture. (This is the land
of the Bauhaus, I suppose.) Just about every building Ive been to has
been done up in styles that would be considered high culture in America.
Including our hotel room, where you can see into the top half of the
shower from the bed and a door swings between the shower and the toilet,
so that you can only use one with any privacy at once.
 
Despite the usual guidebook platitudes, Berlin does not feel like a
particularly vibrant city. Abandoned construction sites are everywhere,
with large quantities of supplies just laying by the street, and
graffiti coats most public surfaces, not enough to demand a repainting,
but enough to make it everpresent. All the stores have signs announcing
that new, shorter hours will begin starting next year. I overhear
complaints about 18% unemployment.
 
With an overseas like this, one wonders why Americans make such a fuss
about going overseas. One can apparently visit Europe with about as much
culture shock as visiting LA: a few different local chains, a different
public transit system, a new accent to learn, and, of course, a new set
of street signs. A convenience for the business traveler, perhaps. A
vast emptiness for everyone else.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 27, 2006
 
Well, there are lots of other cities in europe where you can really feel differences. I would say that some main cities are very similar to each other, but just go to smaller places.
 
Although imperialism is imperialism.
 
If you ever come to Madrid Ill be glad to show you the city.
 
posted by lvaro
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
Hey, Im with ya, but having a T-Mobile store in Berlin is NOT US cultural imperialism  T-Mobile is Deutsche Telekom.
 
This highlights an interesting aspect of the imperialism  its not necessarily US imperialism. Rather, its fast becoming multinational corporate imperialism, through which the US is just as colonized by German brands as Germany is colonized by US brands (or Japanese brands, like Sony; or Finnish brands, like Nokia, etc).
 
Its actually a measure of how successful these multinationals are that an American feels like T-Mobile is an American company thats slightly out-of-place in Berlin. They manage to make your local franchise ghetto feel genuinely local, even if all the logos on display represent nominally foreign companies.
 
posted by Cory Doctorow
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
With an overseas like this, one wonders why Americans make such a fuss about going overseas. 
 
Aaron, Europe is not the only overseas out there.  Europe and the United States share a lot of commonalities as most of us Americans are descendants from European immigrants.  Even disregarding the American cultural imperialism you see going back to Europe, youre going to see some of Europe in America, although really watered down.  Try going to a radically different place.  Kragen and I have been traveling in Latin America and its very different here.  Yes, there are American influences here as well, but the countries here are on such different levels of economic strength that it boggles the mind and opens the eyes.  We have found that large cities are similar, but you can find the unique difference if you pay attention.
 
I would like to suggest that you stop being so negative in your posts.  Life is not that bad, really.  Look for the joys and simple pleasures and you will find them.  Life is much more enjoyable that way.
 
posted by Beatrice M
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
The Reichstag was the seat of government for many years before the Nazis came around.  It burned in 1933 when the Nazis took power, and was more or less unusable until 1964.  So Im not sure its accurate to call it the former home of the Nazis.
 
I suppose if I overheard European tourists on a bus in the US gabbing about ugly episodes in American history, Id turn and look too  it seems kinder to talk about the touchier points of your hosts history more privately.
 
posted by chris
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
Hey Aaron,
 
One thing Ive noticed in what little travel Ive done is how inaccurate a first glance can be - especially without a person on the inside as (for lack of a better expression) a guide.
 
American cities are deceptively similar but after staying a while and talking to people I realize just how different a locality can be from another.
 
Id assume even more so with Berlin - a little patience and a little conversation might reveal all kinds of wonders that make you exclaim at how different it is.
 
posted by David Seruyange
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
Im almost with Cory and Beatrice here but David nails it.
 
Also, smaller towns might turn out to be more vivid than larger cities. They attract the kind of folk who cant cope with uniform masses, hein?
 
posted by Tommi
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
Comparison USA-Germany
http://math-www.uni-paderborn.de/~axel/us-d.html
 
posted by Dimitar Vesselinov
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
Honey, you did NOT visit Berlin. Next time you go, give me a call and Ill arrange for you to have a proper tour.
 
posted by Madge Weinstein
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
Hm, methinks you are in town for 23C3?
Anyways, calling postwar junk buildings put up in a rush after all the real architects had died modernist is cynical at best and deluded at worst.
 
posted by martin
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
Aaron, why dont you meet your fellow Wired writer Momus whos living in Berlin and always singing praises of how great the city is? I dont know for sure whether the two of you would have something to talk about but it could be nice.
 
http://imomus.livejournal.com/
 
posted by FrF
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
Im amazed at some of the things youve said here and your apparent attitude to travel. Perhaps youve come across as more cynical and impolite than you are IRL, but I cant help feeling that this is verging on a caricature of how we Europeans see American tourists.
 
Is they get to keep speaking their quirky little language really an acceptable sentiment on visiting a foreign country? Was bitte and danke seriously beyond you? Do you really think that if a German visited New York and noted how many Vietnamese the Americans killed s/he would get a better reception than you did on mentioning the Nazis? And I cant really believe that you dont understand how EU integration works, surely even the most moronic guide book would cover these basic issues.
 
Go take up all these offers to see the real Berlin. Youll be vastly more enlightened for it.
 
posted by Sarah
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
I am sorry to see that you are a soul not sensitive enough to feel the particularities of this fantastic city of millions. As we all know, cultural globalization, and its according cultural homogenization, usually only lies at the surface of things. Did you really get down to talking to some young people? did you visit the art shops, the squat houses, the various cultural scenes? Did you learn about life in Berlin? Of course, as a tourist you may not be able to get to the core of a place I such a short time span. But you gotta open up your mind, and make contact with people. You are allowed to dislike Berlin, that is your very right to have your own taste. But do not do so under the heading its all the same, because then you are writing more about yourself than about the city. Perhaps you yourself are culturally numbed, no longer able to absorb a places particularities and nature? Maybe, from the very start in the airport, you were wearing the wrong glasses? If you are weary of cultural homogenization or so-called Americanization, at least make the effort to be an original, individual human being, with his own capabilities to discover a place.
 
posted by Alissa22
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
Aaron  As some commenters have already noted, this is an unfortunate first impression many Americans seem to have when they travel overseas. Americans see familiar signs and then propagate the myth of Americanization taking over culture. For the most part, its inaccurate. Read How American Is Globalization by William Marling to learn more about this myth.
 
posted by Ben Casnocha
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
When you will come to France, please feel free to mail me. I will be more than happy to give you a taste of the differences between one of the european country and the US.
 
I have given a tour to some american collegues more than once. They never made the mistake of thinking that european countries are so similar to USA ;-)
 
posted by Franois Granger
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
The metros of the world arent very much different, Aarona middle-class-or-above life anywhere is pretty much the same. Granite roads. Office complexes. Malls. And so on.
 
posted by Firas
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
I realized this was the former home of the Nazis.
 
That would be Bavaria, not Berlin.
 
posted by Keith Gaughan
 on December 28, 2006 #
 
To my understanding the graffiti in Berlin is more of a feature than it is a bug.
 
posted by Alper
 on December 28, 2006 #
 
Okay, this is like banging my head up against a wall; Im not quite sure why I continue to read your blog when it just frustrates me.
 
But as an American who lived in Germany, I have to bluntly note that YOU are coming across as the (rightfully hated) Ugly American.  And  once again  Im perhaps wrongly surprised.  Youre a smart guy.  But your entry here suggests a cluelessness, a callousness, and (again) an emptiness that is depressing and regrettable.
 
Why so superficial?  Why cant you look deeper, Aaron?  I would ask if you talked to any people but a better question would be: did you LISTEN?  I mean, really listen?  Do you ever?  Or do you simply find it less troublesome to assume, to block out, to put a fortress around your mind and soul?
 
Berlin, like any city, is unique and  in many ways  truly compelling.  Its more than its outward appearance, more than the most infamous aspects of its history.
 
Im not saying you have to like it.  Many of my German friends  even a couple who LIVE in Berlin  hate the city.  But to simply blow it off, to remark on superficial similarities and not to exhibit a sense of wonder, of curiosity thats bleak and ridiculous.
 
Im guessing you dont really care dont care what others think, dont really care that YOU are not deeply thinking.  Its easier just to blather out words on a page or a screen.  And I should stop caring.
 
But when I see someone who has the mental (if not emotional) capacity to understand, to appreciate it makes me sad when that potential is not realized.
 
Make some friends.  Smile.  Appreciate.  Even if you decide to hate humanity, at least open your heart to individuals and individual moments.
 
Do it not for some random guy you dont know from Adam.  Do it for yourself.  And okay, maybe your readers, too, so we dont just gnash our teeth reading what we know is beneath you and beneath us.
 
posted by Adam
 on December 28, 2006 #
 
I was about to say you are well on your way to becoming Philip Greenspun 2.0. However, as bad as his travel writing is, it is much more thoughtful than yours.
 
Aside from that tiny bit of individuality, cities in America are almost literally indistinguishable, down to the streets and landscaping.
 
Are you sure youve lived in Illinois, Cambridge, and San Francisco?
 
posted by alex samoyed
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
I can only echo some of the other comments. Ive often heard that American cities are all alike, but it strikes me as an affectation that stresses the superficial. Im currently in suburban Detroit, and cant begin to count the ways its different from suburban Boston, even though they both have many of the same stores. Is L.A. anything like San Francisco? Is San Antonio much like Houston, for that matter? Id similarly caution you not to make generalizations about Europe based on Berlin, since you appear to have had only a glancing experience with the latter.
 
As for the modernist architecture, its also apparent here and there in London, but its clear the Luftwaffe was as much to blame for that calamity as postwar architects. So I wouldnt call it a taste as a matter of expediency. Try comparing cities that were leveled with comparable cities that werent: instead of Berlin, try Prague or Copenhagen. You can even compare it with Munich, where postwar planners tried their best to mimic the citys earlier look.
 
Regarding your encounter on the bus, Aaron, I doubt the odd looks you received had much at all to do with Germans trying to forget their Nazi past. And neither is it simply a matter of etiquette. I try to imagine myself on a New York subway encountering a tourist who was not only unaware of some of the most basic aspects of my citys history, but willing to announce it as some sort of revelation to all the other passengers. Wow, so all these theaters around Times Square, they staged musicals at one point? or Wall Street  world financial capital  never made the connection. I would judge this person a complete ignoramus and wonder what on earth brought him here. (Id also kick his ass and rob him, but thats besides the point.)
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Who said anything about Americanization? I never said that the cultural imperialism was Americas.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Is they get to keep speaking their quirky little language really an acceptable sentiment on visiting a foreign country?
 
I was trying to indicate that I hated this sentiment.
 
Was bitte and danke seriously beyond you?
 
Ive said both.
 
Do you really think that if a German visited New York and noted how many Vietnamese the Americans killed s/he would get a better reception than you did on mentioning the Nazis?
 
Depends on which New Yorkers you asked. Not sure what your point is.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
I wasnt complaining that people were looking at me; I certainly was being stupid.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
I was saying Germany was the former home of the Nazis, not Berlin, Bavaria, or the Reichstag.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Then what.
 
SF was former home of Ohlones or new people who expelled and marginalized them in such a short while.
 
Much of the USA can be mapped as not very tolerant, segregating European origin peoples home. - and is that former or still - is?
 
Who taught you not to look forward and think of something, but just carelessly write down those lines about past - which - wasnt, say easy for everyone.
 
Come back to SF and look at Ohlones territorial map in Wikipedia. And look outside of your windows from Wired office and your apts.
 
Its been less than 200 years or so.
 
And please look forward. If you are not doing that why quote past? Who told you its meaningful to quote past in such way?
 
posted by Former Former
 on December 30, 2006 #
 
I was saying Germany was the former home of the Nazis, not Berlin, Bavaria, or the Reichstag.
 
It actually took you awhile to realize that, as you claim in the essay?
 
posted by staunch buddy
 on December 31, 2006 #
 
I can only agree with Adams post. Its sad that you have such a shallow view on things. Do you really expect to understand the city just by going though a street?
Its not the streetsings that make Berlin different - its its culture and history (which are quite different from an average US city I suppose). And that one you learn when you talk to people. If you go out one night in Berlin in the not touristy places, youll notice.
 
posted by Thomas
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
Your comments about Berlin are totally irrelevant. And let me tell you that you dont give a positive image of the American open-mindedness, and in addition you totally fit to the image that we Europeans have about Americans, i.e total ignorants. Im back from this city just yesterday, and this was my second trip there. This place is just great for someone who has a little interest for culture and/or intelligence. Before making such a description of a city you dont know, youd better get some more information about it. It basically seems that you visited only Tegel airport and Potsdamer Platz, which is not a real broad view of such a big town that Berlin is, is it? Ive been there during the World Cup and for Xmas and New Years Eve and let me tell you that the Berliners rock. Theyve got warm hearts. And as far as the culture and architecture, youve not been to far, have you? Have you seen the Wall Memorial? The Holocaust Memorial? Have you seen Hackescher Markt?  Have you seen any of the thousand parks this city has? Any Berliner would just call you names if one comes to see your post - which is the case by now, btw.  This city is in perpetual movement and evolution, which you dont seem to have grasped so farif youd like to find Imperialism, be it cultural, military, or economic, have a look at your side of the Atlantic.
 
posted by Totof
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
I cannot help but suspect that its not so much the lack of being different than perhaps a somewhat underdeveloped perception and appreciation of differences that might be the issue here. Granted, in a Western metropolis, an American traveler will not be able to ooh-ahh at odd ways of writing, weird dress or modes of transportation, or any other signs of non-Western living that MacTourists seem to expect to find on their travels. But vast emptiness?
 
Berlin is not only the former capital of Nazi Germany [*], and as such full of historical sites from those days, it is also (at least in part) the capital of a former COMECON country, and the place where the cold war not so long ended, live and in color, in front of the world and its cameras, and it is not difficult to find all sorts of left-overs from those times, either. Berlin is, in many ways, one of the focal points of modern history, and there arent too many of those around. Running around a place like that and complaining about the Dunkin Donuts and T-Mobile shops (which, of course, originated in Germany, so at least for them it should not come as a surprise to find them there), and the vast emptiness they presumably signal, seems weirdly incongruous.
 
Maybe its the same effect that you run into when learning a different language-until you have trained your ear to perceive the different sounds, you wont be able to hear them, much less speak them. Until you have educated your cultural perception to see the differences, all you see is that the Dunkin Donuts is the same as where you come from.
 
The real cultural imperialism is not the fact that Dunkin Donus opens shops in Europe, or that the Telekom opens shops in the U.S. Todays cultural imperialism is exemplified by people who travel around the globe only to assess the culture of a place by the brands on the store fronts outside the hotel and airport, and from their tour bus.
 
 jwj (jwj at acm dot org)
 
[*]Is it really a big surprise that people might object to having foreigners yack about it in public? What about foreigners talking about slavery in the U.S., or shooting the crap about American foreign policy in public in this country? Would Americans delight in being identified with these things by foreign visitors? Its like running around Rome whining about Mussolini, or, as an American, speaking about Hiroshima in a Tokyo subway.
 
posted by jwj
 on January  9, 2007 #
 
Because wherever you go, you are still there.
 
posted by punklicht
 on January 10, 2007 #
 
Aaron, as someone who has spent a significant amount of time in Berlin, it appears that that you went to Times Square and missed the East Village, Harlem, Chinatown, Lower East Side, Brooklyn, and everything in between. Clearly one can only see limited parts of a city in a limited amount of time (and my impression is that you wrote this post after only having spent one day there), but to merely go to Times Square and purport to make judgments about New York City as a whole is just wrong.
 
Berlin is one of the most vibrant cities that I have ever been to, and Ive traveled quite a bit. The cultural vibrancy of Berlin is truly striking,  due largely to the cheap rents in the East after German reunification and the artsy, Bohemian crowd that quickly flocked there as a result. During the late 90s, Berlin was like one big construction site. Cranes were everywhere, and everything was under transition. While the cranes are now for the most part gone, Berlin has not lost its quality as a city that moves extremely rapidly, sometimes even too much so. For example, when I traveled there from one year to the next, entire areas of the city had completely changed in appearance, many new spaces had opened up and others closed, and some of my favorite places were gone.
 
One of the things that always struck me about Berlin, though, was how easy it was to completely miss the real Berlin, to visit the city yet not permeate its seemingly rough exterior. Luckily, my experience was somewhat different, due in large part to my penchant for delving deeply into cities, the length of time I spent there (almost a year in total), my German language abilities, and my love for going out and meeting new people. I lived in the East, and barely, if ever made it to the West (with the one major exception of Kreuzberg, particularly the area known as Little Istanbul around Kotbusser Tor and the famed punk area called SO 36.) One of the great qualities about many parts of the former East, though, is the lack of commercializationsomething that you obviously did not perceive, probably because you did not venture there. While admittedly, things have gotten more commercialized/globalized within the last 10 or so years, including such things as a mall in Prenzlauer Berg and the opening of the Sony Center at Potsdamer Platz, Berlin is still very low on the scale of Cultural Imperialism in my mind.
 
My guess is that you did not make it to many of the places that I did, and while I know you didnt have nearly as much time, its really a shame. Maybe instead of basing your impressions on the Dunkin Donuts and the (yes, German) T-Mobile stores in the touristy areas of the city, you could have explored its vibrant art scene,  its notorious underground music scene, its serene parks, its warehouse-rich post-industrial areas, or its kietz-oriented squares. If you had, you would have seen a completely different city, what I consider the real Berlin.
 
If you do ever decide to go back, please do talk to me first.
 
posted by Elizabeth Stark
 on January 12, 2007 #
 
I have given a tour to some american collegues more than once. They never made the mistake of thinking that european countries are so similar to USA ;-)
 
posted by skype
 on January 26, 2007 #
 
dear Aaron,
 
I can only express my sympthies for how youve been berated based on your Blog. I have spent 11 years in Berlin and have never encountered so much ignorance, defensiveness, and deniability and utter intollerance to other peoples truth as in that city. I dont know how long or how short your stay was but guess would be it isnt for you and thats fine.
 
I didt even see anything attacking in your blog and cant see what the other people got ther panties up in a bunch for.
 
And I have lived in every neigborhood and hung out in every scene. Berlin has always been to me sub-mediocre AT BEST!
 
posted by massimo
 on February  6, 2007 #
 
One thing that was left out by all the other (justified) critics who posted comments: the areas which Aaron describes are in the most commercial and touristed part of the city, i.e. Tiergarten and the Mitte, which comprise some 45 out of the 891 sq. km which the city of Berlin covers.  Can you really evaluate a city after seeing less than 1/20th of it?
 
Another thing - T-Punkt has nothing to do with Ashton Kucher.  Lol.  Punkt means point in German as in, service point.  Its this sort of Anglocentric interpretation which makes continental Europeans throw their hands in the air
 
posted by Alice
 on June 15, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 24, 2006
 
Title: The Journalists Creed
 
I am not sure what more I could tell you about these pieces. I could tell you that I liked doing some of them more than others, but that all of them were hard for me to do, and took more time than perhaps they were worth; that there is always a point in the writing of a piece when I sit in a room literally papered with false starts and cannot put one word after another and imagine that I have suffered a small stroke, leaving me apparently undamaged but actually aphasic. I was in fact as sick as I had ever been when I was writing Slouching Towards Bethlehem; the pain kept me awake at night and so for twenty and twenty-one hours a day I drank gin-and-hot-water to blunt the pain and took Dexedrine to blunt the gin and wrote the piece. (I would like you to believe that I kept working out of some real professionalism, to meet the deadline, but that would not be entirely true; I did have a deadline, but it was also a troubled time, and working did to the trouble what gin did to the pain.) What else is there to tell? I am bad at interviewing people. I avoid situations in which I have to talk to anyones press agent. (This precludes doing pieces on most actors, a bonus in itself.) I do not like to make telephone calls, and would not like to count the mornings I have sat on some Best Western motel bed somewhere and tried to force myself to put through the call to the assistant district attorney. My only advantage as a reporter is that I am so physically small, so temperamentally unobtrusive, and so neurotically inarticulate that people tend to forget that my presence runs counter to their best interests. And it always does. That is one last thing to remember: writers are always selling somebody out.
 
(Joan Didion, Slouching Towards Bethlehem, xv-xvi)
 
In fact I have abandoned altogether that kind of pointless entry; instead I tell what some would call lies. Thats simply not true, the members of my family frequently tell me when they come up against my memory of a shared event. The party was not for you, the spider was not a black widow, it wasnt that way at all. Very likely they are right, for not only have I always had trouble distinguishing between what happened and what merely might have happened, but I remain unconvinced that the distinction, for my purposes, matters. The cracked crab that I recall having for lunch the day my father came home from Detroit in 1945 must certainly be embroidery, worked into the days pattern to lend verisimilitude; I was ten years old and would not now remember the cracked crab. The days events did not turn on cracked crab. And yet it is precisely that fictitious crab that makes me see the afternoon all over again, a home movie run all too often, the father bearing gifts, the child weeping, an exercise in family love and guilt. Or that is what it was to me. Similarly, perhaps it never did snow that August in Vermont; perhaps there never were flurries in the night wind and maybe no one else felt the ground hardening and summer already dead even as we pretended to bask in it, but that was how it felt to me, and it might as well have snowed, could have snowed, did snow.
 
(Slouching, 134)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 24, 2006
 
And it surely it did snow. I like to think that the world is what we make of it. That might be a bit daft, and it definitely even makes others come up with extreme perspectives. Such as the world being made of mint jelly. History goes hand-in-hand with the world. The kings, dates, battles of today and yesterday, yeah. They happened, but only to those who are sure it did (or not so sure).
 
posted by Daniel Taveras
 on December 26, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 23, 2006
 
Title: Sociology or Anthropology
 
Sometimes people ask me what the difference is between sociology and anthropology. There are the surface ones, of course  sociology typically studies first-world societies, whereas anthropology has a rep for studying so-called primitive cultures. But the fundamental difference is a philosophical one: sociologists study society, while anthropologists study culture.
 
Whats the difference? Lets do a case study. Its easy to notice a subtle sort of sexism in American textbooks. For example, studies have found that in biology textbooks sperm are seen as competitive creatures while eggs are passive receptacles they aim to penetrate. But the actual science on the subject is much less clear: eggs seem to do a fair bit of selection themselves, etc.
 
I saw a paper by an anthropologist on this fact; their argument was that these textbooks were a result of the sexism of American culture, a culture which sees men as competing for access to women, and those notions are naturally transported onto our writing about conception. Sexist culture, sexist output.
 
A sociologist would dig a little deeper. Theyd see who writes the textbooks, perhaps notice a disproportionate number of males. Theyd look into why it was that males got these jobs, find the sexism inherent in the relevant institutions. Theyd argue it was the structures of society that end up with sexist textbooks, not some magical force known as American culture.
 
As you might guess, Im on the side of the sociologists. Blaming things on culture  as if it were a natural property of a group of people or a mystical life force with its own mind  seems too facile. It also seems wrong.
 
Ive mostly been talking about the cultural anthropologists, but there are also a subset of racist anthropologists (sometimes called anthropological science, in accordance with Walls Law). These anthropologists tried to measure different properties of people, see if they could quantify the differences between the races and predict criminality from the shape of the head.
 
Cultural anthropologists disdain all that and prefer to endorse a very left-wing notion of cultural relativism. (One shouldnt make judgments about other cultures!) But in doing so, they end up pushing the judgments off onto the peoples involved. Just like the racist anthropologists, they end up suggesting that the reason people over here believe act differently from the people over there is because theyre different people.
 
But if theres one thing weve learned from psychology, its that  for the most part  people are people, wherever you go. As Zimbardos Stanford Prison Experiment showed, put normal people into the wrong situation and they turn into devious enforcement machines. And put the same people into a different society and theyll change just as fast.
 
It isnt culture  whatever that is  that causes these things; its institutions. Institutions create environments which force a course of action. And thats why Im a sociologist.
 
Bonus recommendation: Ive been watching The Wire lately; perhaps the most sociologically-inclined show on television. And thats what makes it interesting, unlike all the other good-evil cop dramas.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 23, 2006
 
The interesting thing to me in Zimbardos study (and even more so in Milgrams earlier shock experiments) is that the subjects were carefully selected to be normal (read white bread go-along-with-it students) and of course they got herd results.
 
The person who would have rebelled and hit the fake guards in the mouth were pre-screened out and this gave a weird (and persistent) mistaken impression that everybody fell into the they were killing Jews, but I wasnt a Jew riff.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on December 23, 2006 #
 
I think youre right to take a systems approach.
 
Where I would caution you, referring to back to your writing about, e.g., Alfie Kohn, is in ever thinking its easier to engineer systems than it is. Which is not to say it cant be done. But its a lot of harder than it looks, and involves dealing with some of the meaner aspects of human behavior.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on December 23, 2006 #
 
What causes institutions?
 
posted by John Meyer
 on December 23, 2006 #
 
Although the cause of institutions is less central to his observations about them, Wolf Wolfensberger at http://www.disabilitymuseum.org/lib/docs/1909.htm makes much clear in the case of the (euphemestically named) schools for the feeble-minded which are among the last vestiges of total institutionalization as a nagging peculiarity, along with eugenics, etc.
 
Love.
 
posted by 
 on December 24, 2006 #
 
In addition to the modern/primitive focus, I would also posit that sociology often takes a more statistically rigorous approach and anthropology is concerned with things, like ethnographies and case studies, that are anecdotal.
 
But if theres one thing weve learned from psychology, its that  for the most part  people are people, wherever you go.
 
Does it really, though? This seems like a broad assumption.
 
posted by Joe Grossberg
 on December 25, 2006 #
 
Like Sartre (and the anarcho-syndicalist in Monty Python and the Holy Grail) you see the violence inherent in the system, but how is it that all these differing institutions come to exist in the first place?
 
Which forces create the institutions that then force courses of action?
 
posted by David Mathers
 on December 25, 2006 #
 
I find your generalizations of both disciplines curious.
 
If all anthropologists did were to use culture as a basis of explanation, they wouldnt be much use at all (Why do some people celebrate Christmas? Its their culture, stupid.)
 
As you point out, there is no magical force known as culture and nor would any but the most nave anthropologist claim that as a reason in its own right.
 
What you describe as a sociological approach to your case could just as well be a social anthropological approach, examining the ways that the American institutional sexism has come about and the assumptions inherent in the system. This is culture, too. :-)
 
That said, I find labels like sociologist and anthropologist enormously unimportant. It all comes down to the methods used, and in that regard there is little to separate the two
 
Instead of describing cultural anthropologists the like of which (I sincerely hope) hasnt been seen since the 1960s, help clear the misunderstanding that these disciplines are so different from one another. Its an artificial distinction curiously maintained by people who should know better.
 
posted by Andreas
 on January  4, 2007 #
 
I have to agree with Andreas.  I myself have a degree in both disciplines and have seen first hand the differing methodologies and perspectives.  Its not that anthropologists end up using the term culture as a cure-all answer to the questions raised in the discipline no more than sociologists use society or institution.
The major difference for me is that while anthropology tends to study aspects of humans through as an organic mass of culture, sociology tends to study specific areas of a society.
Thus, while an anthropologist might study an area and make inferences on the overarching mindset, a sociologist studying the same area traces specific lines of social connections.
In the end however, the two are very similar.  Nevertheless they can both mutually aide each other, as shown by the numerous amounts of both sociologists and anthropologists using research from both disciplines.
 
As a side note  I personally found anthropologists to be more warm and engaging than sociologists.
 
posted by Leonard
 on January  8, 2008 #
 
But the actual science on the subject is much less clear: eggs seem to do a fair bit of selection themselves, etc.
 
In my opinion, this is a counter-intuitive result.  I certainly hadnt heard it before.  It seems to me that we should not attribute to malice what can be attributed to ignorance.
 
Also, isnt it possible that males did, in fact, evolve to be more competetive?  And if they did, then why is it sexist to say so?
 
Lets suppose the science is undecided on this topic.  How can we hope for a balanced analysis if one conclusion is considered boorish and politically incorrect?
 
posted by John Maxwell
 on October 21, 2008 #
 
An anthropologist might respond: But why does it seem counter-intuitive? Because of the sexism latent in the culture. The point is not that we cant say things that seem intuitive or offensive; just that we be careful to overcome our biases and carefully look at the facts  something the textbooks and Baumeister clearly havent done.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 21, 2008 #
 
The characterization you make of anthropology might have been true about 70 years ago, but the field is a very different place now.  Political economy, pratice theory, anthropology of the first world, and on and onno anthropologist these days would simply boil down any social phenomenon to its the culture and leave it at that.  Also, the point of cultural relativism (and it should be noted that not all anthropologists consider themselves cultural relativists, although this was an important step in moving past the racist tendencies of early anthropology and sociology) is not that those people are different but that different expression comes from human universals reacting in different situations.
 
Anthropology and sociology have a lot of common history, common theory, and common aims.  You might want to read a bit more about anthropology before dismissing it out of hand.
 
posted by Gemma
 on November 29, 2009 #
 
I think you way oversimplify how cultural anthropologists view culture. You speak of them as if they formulate no theory, and as if they dont utilize the concepts of society and institution. You also fail to acknowledge the limitations of the quantitative approach (the most obvious example being how ethnicity, a word which itself has only the vaguest of definitions, is used to derive statistical data that is potentially misleading or unhelpful).
 
Lastly, Id like to point out that it was a cultural anthropologist, Franz Boas, who punched holes in the arguments of the same eugenicist scholars you mentionusing the same forms of measurement they did, no less, just done more accurately and with the understanding that succeeding generations of children born to immigrant parents were experiencing physiological changes due to new diets and environments, etc.
 
Point being, you do a great injustice to both fields with your flippant and uninformed analysis of their differences. Why would you cut yourself off from one or the other, when both come with built-in advantages and disadvantages?
 
It comes down to being a good scholar, period.
 
posted by Amanda
 on February  3, 2010 #
 
Thank you so much. This made me understand the differences between sociology and anthropology much clearer and made succint the nebulous distinctions I had between the two. If I were to succintly summarize the difference between sociology and anthroplogy I would repeat what you said in the first paragraph:
sociology studies society and anthropology studies culture. Put in another way I would say sociology studies what groups do and anthropology studies what groups think. Put in another way I would say sociology studies what makes groups of poeple the same while anthropology studies what makes groups of people different.
 
I once heard anthropology was the most humanistic of the sciences and I can see how this is the case. Personally I feel more attracted to anthropology because I am more attracted to culture than society. Plus I feel like I get enough hard science through the other subjects I study.
 
posted by Delong
 on August 30, 2010 #
 
Wow.
 
Well, aside from the problem I have with your grossly out of date representation of anthropology as racist, I have a few problems with sociology, myself.
 
First off, no anthropologist in todays day and age would accept that the explanation for anything was because its their culture. Thats like a psychologist saying that someone is a serial killer because of their behavior. No shit. There is always some kind of argument made to explain HOW it relates to people,s understandings of certain concepts, in this case say by looking at how gender roles are created, understood, and reproduced symbolically within the social group which produced these sexist textbooks. Just saying culture as if it is something quantifiable is probably the worst thing you can do in anthropology, so bad anthropologists even have their own term for it: reification.
 
Rather than looking for simple cause-effect relationships, anthropologists are interested in the meanings people give things in the most taken-for-granted ways within their social contexts. A dumb blonde joke makes sense to people in Canada and the US because the dumb blonde has meanings which were historically created, are locally understood, and continue to be reproduced in our respective societies. Sure, there are pockets of resistance where people say this is sexist, but some people would argue that they arent talking about A dumb blonde, theyre just making a joke. Now, you can call these people liars and force them to admit their own internalized sexism, which would give you some great research material, Im sureor you could realize that on some level, this social trope is being understood through a different system of meaning which is somehow defining and reproducing (with varying levels of success) sexist beliefs, and instead look for WHY these beliefs exist in the first place.
 
You could do this by examining what qualities people associate with femininity, look at what kind of discourses exist about women among different groups (men, women, the media), how is the masculine then constructed as opposite to the feminine? There are so many venues of access to explore because anthropologists understand that humans live lives that are enmeshed in, and indeed lived through meanings.
 
What culture really is is still up for debate in the field of anthropology. I mean saying its a shared set of meanings, values, and beliefs within a certain social group is facile, but its the only definition we can really agree on right now. You can still tell its there though. Would you say that gravity doesnt exist just because we dont understand it? We can feel it anytime we fall, and similarly, we can feel our culture the moment we go to another country and realize how strange things look to our unaccustomed eyes.
 
Lets put this issue to rest: phrenology was NOT just practiced by anthropologists. It also ceased to be taken seriously some time ago.
 
Yes, anthropology was undoubtedly labelled the hand-maiden of colonialism and with good reason! It started out as a practice by missionaries and aristocrats, usually for the purpose of demeaning or converting other non-white, non-Christian civilizations. But sociology had just as rocky a past, and just as many who believed (as anthropologists of the time did) that certain primitive people were stuck in a period of history that Western civilizations had long since surpassed.
 
This being said, which discipline created the field of post-colonial studies? Not sociology. Anthropology was the first discipline to be self reflective about its role in colonization, and to this day, it continues to educate people about the fallacies of its past, something that was never explored in my sociology class. Not only that, but some early anthropologists (Franz Boas and his students in particular)were also fierce advocates for the groups of people they lived with and learned from in a period of intense and very institutionalized racism.
 
Finally, I have a problem with how seriously the other social sciences take themselves. To this day, anthropology is one of the only disciplines to really get that some things cant by their very nature be studied objectively. Anthropology tries to be inter-subjective, which basically means trying to see the world through the eyes of the people they study, and to gain some understanding of what meanings people ascribe to certain concepts through listening to the stories they tell each other about themselves. You cant ever hope to understand -all- the complex meanings people live their lives through everyday, but anthropologists try anyways, and thats one of the reasons why we have such a better understanding of the way other people live now than 30 years ago.
 
The main goal of anthropology is to try and see humans as humans, without trying to reduce people to ticks on a survey sheet, and without disregarding all of the messy, contradictory, and complex systems of meaning that go along with making sense of the worldand thats why I love it.
 
posted by Pinchy
 on October 22, 2010 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 22, 2006
 
Title: Cliche Finder
 
Its not an essay, but I hope I can count it as a blog post. Heres a new hack I made for my friend Quinn:
 
Cliche Finder
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 22, 2006
 
Many of those on the cliches list are more like dead metaphors or redundant phrases than actual cliche.
 
A cliche is a phrase that has lots its novelty. It still retains its meaning. Something like, Stay the course would be a cliche. It does mean what it says it means, but its done, finished and trite. Surge will likewise be so in a minute or two.
 
posted by talboito
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
I know, but I was looking for a single word to use.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
Whos counting your blog posts, dude?
 
I hope youre writing those essays because you enjoy them. Thats why were reading.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
true facts and sworn affidavits are also high on the list of the Department of Redundancy Department.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
Very nice! This would actually be a very useful tool if integrated into a word processor like spell checking. It would help keep ones writing more concise.
Of course, when writing about business or politics (and especially when preparing a legal document), there should be the option to add redundancy, hehe.
 
As for calling it clichs I agree that that is the most all-embracing term to use. But for version 2.0 Id suggest a more fine-grained approach, e.g. separating clichs, redundant statements, idioms, jargon, buzzwords etc. That would be interesting.
 
posted by Daniel hrgaard
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
Personally, I prefer it when blogs have high signal to noise ratio (there, another cliche). I think its better to write a few deep and meaningful blog posts as opposed to writing something everyday just because you feel pressured too. If ever you need convincing of this just check out the blog of this mini-genius:
 
http://sethgodin.typepad.com/
 
The guys clearly brilliant! But I use RSS and everyday Seth Godin would put up a post, sometimes he shouldnt have bothered. RSS is fabulous.
 
My 2 cents <- Cliche #2, or #3?
 
posted by Naz
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
I was looking for a single word to use.
 
I believe that the word youre looking for is pleonasm.
 
posted by mike
 on December 26, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 21, 2006
 
Title: Museums and Exploratoriums
 
The San Francisco Exploratorium is widely regarded as one of the finest hands-on museums in the world. There are spinoffs in the San Francisco airport and a Klutz book. Like Richard Feynman,
the museum has become something of a touchstone of rightness for the science-minded community.
 
The Exploratorium is no doubt a fine museum, as far as such things go, but like all museums, it is deeply flawed. Like most media of American education, museums are hugely ineffective edifices.
 
The museum presents a golden opportunity to teach. You have a crowd that is explicitly seeking out knowledge, coming to you in person, giving you a large chunk of their time, and accompanied by their friends and family. It is hard to imagine a more ideal setting for education. And yet, this golden chance is squandered by boring exhibit designs.
 
Many museums simply present nominally educational things, like pieces of art or natural specimens of science, with a couple sentences of explanation. It is not clear what one is actually supposed to learn from this and in practice the answer seems to be: not much.
 
Science museums take things another step by showing actual examples of physical principles, and the Exploratorium goes a step further by letting the kids control them. But in my experience although there were many interesting principles on display, there was little learning. Each exhibit has been regarded as a little toy, to be pushed and prodded until you get bored and move on to something else.
 
Its not the visitors fault: the exhibit makes the principle at work less than clear and even if someone was interested in reading the accompanying text, it rarely says much more than the name of the phenomenon; no actual explanation is provided.
 
Museums have infuriated me on this front since I visited them as a little kid. I remember drawing up plans for a genuinely educational museum, and although I was extremely young at the time, the general principles still seem sound: split people up into groups, have them try to solve real problems, encourage them to sit and engage with something over time instead of flitting from exhibit to exhibit, make it just as rewarding for adults as well as kids. (My more specific ideas from that period, involving floating chairs going down rear-projection tunnels, seem a little sillier.)
 
But even in the multi-exhibit model used by the Exploratorium there is much that could be improved. The exhibits could use what Tufte calls small multiples to give kids a physical intuition about a phenomenon by letting them change the relevant variables, rather than just showing them one case. The descriptions could give the force vectors and equations for each examples instead of just the name. Some of it might go over kids heads, but even just getting them accustomed to such things is a valuable skill.
 
Museums, like lectures, seem to be one of those things that are simply taken for granted as a necessary part of being cultured. Cities have to have them, citizens have to visit them. Everybody involved feels virtuous about the enterprise and nobody ever asks if anything is being learned.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 21, 2006
 
nobody ever asks if anything is being learned.
 
Thats not true. You just did as have many before you.
 
We have come to equate interactive with a wikification and theyre still in some broadcast model where interacting consists in changing channels rather than changing whats on the channel.
 
We are in the minority about this but we are also in the minority who wouldnt be allowed in the famous psychological experiments (like the prison one at Stanford) and hence those are made absurd with their claims about human nature, etc.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
I agree - many museums do not connect dots, and do not inspire new conclusions.
 
There are some museums that promote viewer analysis and spark new conclusions.  For example, the Holocaust museum in Washington D.C. evaluates, through strong copy and powerful artifacts, the social, political, and economic factors that gave rise to the holocaust.  Every exhibit is well integrated with other exhibits on the timeline.
 
posted by Anthony
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
Hmm.  Judging from this and a couple of other posts  I really wonder why you bother writing these elaborate put-downs of one thing or the other.  They are all well written, often insightful but just as often they are very one-sided. One-sidedness is very helpful in making them concise and to the point but at the same time, makes them hard to take seriously.  It almost feels dogmatic at times (I hope this word isnt too harsh, Im not a native speaker and often miss the subtleties).
 
If this is a quest to define yourself in comparison to others and what you do and do not like, Id find it more worth your while if you made that explicit.  Just my 2 cents.
 
posted by ingo
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
I largely agree with your criticism, but Im skeptical about there being some ideal interactive scenario that allows you to teach science to museumgoers. I have a much better time taking my kids through old-style archival museums like New Yorks Museum of Natural History or even Harvards no-frills Zoological Museum than a place like Bostons Science Museum, which is more hands-on and modeled after SFs Exploratorium. Part of this is what you describe: you approach an exhibit asking yourself, whats the game going to be this time? I get the impression that figuring out how youre supposed to interact with each exhibit and what the agenda is may crowd out the experience of learning in a more passive, contemplative way. I remember as a kid in New Yorks Natural History museum being impressed by the massive collection of specimens mounted behind display cases, a style of exhibit that seems to be frowned upon these days. But I took a lot away from it: the astonishing variety, how different species were adapted to a particular environmental task, addressing how to classify them all, etc.
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
Experiencing The Exploratorium as a visitor is like surfing the web without ever contributing content. Frank Oppenheimers vision extended to more than just an experience for visitors.  The experience starts with the creators of the learning displays. Why dont you make a display there yourself? The institution is  pretty open, or at least it used to be.
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on December 26, 2006 #
 
ingo: If you cant read a critique without believing it either entirely or not at all, youve got bigger problems. Perhaps its one sided, but someone else can give you the other side.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Hi.  Just came across your Museums and Exploratoriums post.
 
Research and evaluation in museums (some of which is summarized at www.informalscience.org) has shown that science museum visitors do learn, not just the specific pedagogical messages of exhibitions, but they learn about themselves, about the world, about asking and answering their own questions in a non-threatening environment, about sharing their ideas and proposing investigations. Perhaps museums strongest suit is to engage, intrigue, inspire, and delight: how often does this happen in school science classes? A positive experience at a science center can offer learners a radically different face of science, one that they feel welcomed and intrigued by. Childrens early interest can significantly shape their later careers: A recent study by Tai (May 2006, Science, 312, p.1143) shows that students who imagined themselves having a science career were more likely to go on and take a degree in science (even controlling for obvious variables like achievement and parents demographics).
 
Most science museums do in fact provide explanations, and the Exploratorium in particular tries to give visitors an explanation rather than mere vocabulary. But complex abstractions such as force vectors and equations have been deliberately reduced from most exhibit collections, in response to studies that have shown that they tend to overwhelm and intimidate visitors who do not already have science backgrounds. Adding information to labels also tends to decrease the chance that visitors will stop and read them, so the trick is to create explanations that are as brief as possible, yet feel satisfying to the majority of visitors. Just as the most effective teacher is someone who can translate science to the level of a learner, the most effective exhibit labels turn out to be those that invite the public to participate in something just slightly beyond what they already know, not those that present symbol-heavy physics curricula.
 
posted by Raphael Rosen
 on January  9, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 19, 2006
 
Title: Drugs and Guns
 
In movies, its clear when the camera is drunk: blurred vision, shaky motions, everything becoming slightly less clear. Its similarly obvious when the camera is on acid: rainbow colors, things melting into each other, and a sort of dazed gaze. Yet, despite the prevalence of pot, Ive never seen a film or TV show where the camera is high on marijuana.
 
Perhaps thats because theres nothing to show. Some deep breaths, a slight tingling sensation, and then an odd feeling as if something is pressing on part of your brain, lifting your head up, making you happy. An odd happiness, to be sure, but a happiness nonetheless. Friends are unable to distinguish between when Ive just gone skinnydipping and when Im simply high. Its hard to show a camera being happy.
 
Contrast this with Omega-3 fatty acids, the fish oil acids that various new studies are supposed to show have all sorts of positive effects for your brain. When I swallowed a stack of Omega-3 pills, I felt as if I was crawling up into my head, living in there instead of plotting the next moves for my body. It made it pretty hard to get anything done.
 
In San Francisco, medical marijuana is perfectly legal and health-food culture makes Omega-3 practically mandatory, but possessing a gun is actually outlawed within city limits (even for off-duty cops). To actually discharge one you have to drive south of the border, where shooting ranges allow deprived northerners to partake of this recreational craze.
 
Unlike the flowing, hippie vibe of drug culture, gun culture is strictly utilitarian: concrete walls, florescent lights, drab carpeting. Tough-looking guys take your license and hand you a gun. First-timers go into the training room for a quick primer on how to use it, then you take your weapon, ammo, and target into the shooting range.
 
Most of the targets are pretty bland  vague silhouettes or bullseyes  but there was one frightening option that featured a blatantly stereotypical illustration of a hooded bad guy character holding a gun to a cute young girls head. Normally descriptions of such pictures are more evocative than the pictures themselves, but this drawing was just about perfect.
 
Naturally, this was the target our neighbors on the shooting range had chosen and were now shooting at with enormous shotguns whose blasts shook the entire room. Meanwhile, I had a small handgun with a little bit of a kick and a simple silhouette.
 
My gun jammed the first couple of times I tried to shoot; I had to go through the process of unloading and reloading it several times before I even shot a single bullet. Its amazing how comically fake the actual gun feels when you do this  it makes all the noises and motions youd expect from a gun, but it seems to lack any internal mechanisms for doing the actual shooting, like a prop for a movie.
 
When I finally did manage to get the gun working, I relaxed, aimed my weapon, and took ten shots at where I thought the bullseye was. (My long-distance eyesight is really terrible and I hadnt thought to bring my glasses until now, so I gave it my best shot.) I shot again and again, the pattern of kicking and aiming becoming almost rhythmic. When the gun was finally empty, I pushed the little button to whirr my target back to me. To my amazement, nearly all ten bullets had gone in right by the bullseye. My partner looked frightened.
 
Whats odd about shooting is how, well, relaxing it is. Something about the furious action of the gun seems to drain you of all your nervous energy. And while, if you think about it, the item youre holding is a weapon of terrible destruction, theres very little visual evidence of that fact. Just as the gun feels like a prop, the whole thing feels like a game: aim, press the trigger, and some dots appear in a piece of paper. But when youre done you dont feel hyped-up like after a video game. Instead you feel as if what you actually discharged was your nervous energy.
 
We rolled up the bullet-ridden silhouette to take home as a souvenir. Maybe Ill mail this to my mom, I said. I dont think thats a very good idea, came the reply.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 19, 2006
 
IIRC Prop H (the gun ban) was chucked out by the Courts over the summer. Theyll keep trying though, San Francisco feels the need to pass something like it every 10 years or so. Not that you would expect it actually accomplish anything if it stuck, the people who use guns to shoot each other probably dont care that guns are banned. shrug
 
posted by Byron
 on December 20, 2006 #
 
The Life Aquatic includes a stoned camera.
 
There is a gun range in the Berkeley Hills as well as in the South Bay. Im sure there are others in various places.
 
Supposedly, there are more Cannabis Clubs in San Francisco than Burger Kings.
 
posted by talboito
 on December 20, 2006 #
 
3rd rock from the sun often had scenes where the camera was high on marijuana.  Usually the scene would involve one of the teenagers trying to keep it together while talking with the parents.  The effect was basically just to wobble the wallpaper back and forthadmittedly not very realistic, but an example on TV nonetheless. ;o)
 
posted by Justin Bishop
 on December 20, 2006 #
 
Sorry, that was the 70s show, not 3rd rock.
 
posted by Justin Bishop
 on December 20, 2006 #
 
Jump cuts to long macro shots of props in the scene would probably do an okay job evoking a stoned camera.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on December 20, 2006 #
 
Of course the absurdity of trying to get a camera high is another use case for Korzybskis the map is not the territory mantra.
 
When I first started toking (1946!) the answer to newbies queries about the effects of reefer was almost invariably here, try this and thats always worked, except for an unfortunate few who get no (or too much) effect from it.
 
The gun part is further encouragement that your writing career is on track.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on December 20, 2006 #
 
So, if guns are banned in SF, where do you keep the handgun you purchased?
 
(I must admit to the assumption that you do live in the city, given previous posts showing your disdain for the burbs.)
 
posted by ged
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
|So, if guns are banned in SF, where do you keep the |handgun you purchased?
 
|(I must admit to the assumption that you do live in |the city, given previous posts showing your disdain |for the burbs.)
 
He could have also rented the gun at the range. Several ranges around here allow that. By the way, the SF law, actually only bans handguns and courts have actually overturned the law.
 
posted by 
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
I dont own a gun.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 29, 2006 #
 
Odd. I take omega-3 every day (Im a vegan so I dont get it from fish), but Ive never felt an effect like that.
 
posted by Adam
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
Many of marijuanas (identifiable) effects are kinesthetic ( low blood pressure, heavy legs, warmth, hunger, etc.) rather than visual.
 
And relaxing effects of shooting seem to  me to be from the combination of relaxing (including dissociating from any startle response) and focusing that is needed to shoot well.  Ive noticed that rhythmic quality too.
 
Aaron, how big or a stack of Omega-3 were you trying when you got that internalizing reaction?
 
posted by paul
 on January  8, 2007 #
 
Free Ringtones Free Ringtones Free Ringtones
 
posted by Free Ringtones
 on April 20, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 19, 2006
 
Title: Medium Stupid
 
In July 1, 2004, Paul Krugman gave a talk about the state of the American economy. After the significant 2001 recession, the economy had begun growing again, with increasing growth in Americas economic output, or GDP. But, unlike the growth in the Clinton years, the extra money being made in America wasnt going to the average person. Instead, as the economy grew, the wages for the average person stagnated or even declined. All the extra money was going to the people at the very top.
 
In the press, President Bushs supporters complained that the public wasnt more happy about the growing economy Bush had given them. After all, hed pulled the country out of a recession; normally thats good for a boost in the polls. Sadly, Americans were just too dumb to notice, Bushs supporters concluded. If only they paid more attention to the news. But what these people are really urging, Krugman explained in his talk, is not that the public should be smart, but that the public should be medium stupid.
 
If the public was really stupid (i.e. uneducated), it wouldnt watch the news at all. Instead, it would notice it was out of work, poorly-paid, or otherwise having trouble making ends meet, and conclude that the economy wasnt doing very well. On the other hand, if the public was really smart, itd dig deep into the numbers to find that  surprise, surprise!  for most people, the economy wasnt doing as well as the headline numbers about GDP growth would suggest. The only way for the public to buy the Bush administration spin is to be medium stupid.
 
The medium stupid idea has much wider applicability. Most specifically, it explains the general state that the mainstream media tries to inculcate in the public. The uneducated American has a general idea that invading other countries is probably a bad idea. The overeducated American can point to dozens of examples of why this is going to be a bad idea. But the medium stupid American, the kind that gullibly reads the New York Times and watches the CBS Evening News, is convinced that Iraq is full of weapons of mass destruction that could blow our country to bits at any minute. A little education can be a dangerous thing.
 
(Along these lines, at one point I was working on a documentary film about the evening news that would demonstrate this point. The title, Medium Stupid, would also be a convenient homage to Medium Cool.)
 
The same is true in school. As Christopher Hayes points out in his genius article, Is A Little Economics A Dangerous Thing?, the uneducated American thinks raising the minimum wage is a pretty good idea  after all, people deserve to be paid more than $5 an hour. And the overeducated American feels the same way; like the dozens of Economics Prize winners who signed a petition to raise the minimum wage, theyve seen the studies showing that raising the minimum wage has only a negligible effect on employment. But those who have only had Economics 101 buy the propaganda that government interference in the market will only make things worse. And, as Hayes shows, this leads to bad decisions in many areas  the minimum wage being only one prominent example.
 
The medium stupid idea has applicability in other areas of life. The uncultured person who knows nothing about fashion doesnt mind wandering around in jeans and a t-shirt. And the overcultured person knows exactly what to wear to be hip. But medium stupid ol me looks bad and feels bad about it.
 
To work, propaganda, be it from the Bush administration or the fashion industry, requires you to be medium stupid. Know too little and you never hear the falsehoods. Know too much and you can spot it for a fraud. Which side of the line do you want to be on?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 19, 2006
 
Thats an interesting observation, but Im not convinced that it makes a useful generalization. For this to be true, youd have to assume that people are rational by default. That is simply not the case and there are indeed many more cases where having a little education is preferable to having none.
 
The strong argument for laissez-faire economics (if there ever was one) is not that of the invisible hand, but that of moral objection to any unnecessary form of coercion.
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on December 19, 2006 #
 
So, Im still undecided about what position to take on minimum wage, but it does strike me that the whole issue is sort of moot.
 
If you want to help low-wage workers, why not support a negative income tax instead of a minimum wage?  That way, you run absolutely no risk of suppressing demand for low-wage work, and you can help people who already earn more than the minimum wage, and you can exclude people who dont need the help, like well-off suburban teenagers working for the summer.
 
(Aside: I know plenty of over-educated smart people who think that the minimum wage is harmful.  You can claim that they are all stupid religious zealots, but claiming it doesnt make it so.)
 
posted by Mark
 on December 19, 2006 #
 
Consider two people, both work the same low-wage job, both hear on the news that GDP is increasing, the economy is improving. One thinks Oh, I guess my low-wage job is the exception, so I should try harder to take advantage of the booming economy. The other thinks GDP isnt increasing my wages, so the economy still sucks for me. Both have the same information. Both, under your labels, are medium stupid.
 
But only one is actually stupid, while the other is smart. Id say the difference isnt how much they know; its how they think about what they know. You can know a lot and be stupid. You can know very little and be smart. I dont see anythink here to suggest that a little education is any more dangerous than complete ignorance or full knowledge. I think the real danger is the concept of /enough/ education - the idea that once weve been told the answers, we should stop asking questions.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on December 19, 2006 #
 
Ive never really thought that raising the minimum wage was that big of a deal, mostly because the final, politically derived, wage level is so much lower than most low-income people actually get.
 
When I worked at McDonalds in the early 90s, the minimum wage was raised(in WA state, or federal, I dont remember).  It didnt effect wages much, because after a few months, everyone typically got raises that pushed them over what the new mimimum wage was set to.  So it effectively raised the wages of employees who are in their first six months of employment.  (4.75 an hour to 5.25 an hour)  It didnt matter to people who worked their longer, because a person who worked there for 2 years was already at 6.50-7 an hour.
 
Over time ive come to realize that the polticially viable level of minimum wage, is far below the level of minimum wage that would be economically damaging.  It also only tends to effect minimum wage job hoppers, who never stay at any one job long enough to achieve significant raises.  (Agriculture would be an exception, but that farm labor market is distorted by illegal or undocumented labor).
 
The minimum wage doesnt hurt, but it certainly doesnt help.
 
posted by William Crim
 on December 19, 2006 #
 
Medium stupid = smart, but not smart enough to agree with Aaron
 
posted by David Karn
 on December 19, 2006 #
 
And for some reason I thought the real reason for increasing the minimum wage wasnt to help those employees, but to allow Congress to increase the poverty threshold.  This is since the minimum wage is a factor in how to calculate the poverty line.
 
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/threshld/thresh05.html
 
I guess that makes me a medium stupid individual.
 
posted by Micheal
 on December 19, 2006 #
 
Im really surprised at the tone of this post.
 
I think you would have been better off stating that it is dangerous when people are only very narrowly exposed to certain ideas.
 
No exposure, and they dont really think about it. Too little exposure, and they arent considering enough of whats involved. Enough exposure, and they arrive at a more complete understanding of what something means.
 
To call people stupid is a dangerous thing. Surprising considering your previous post about encouraging people to not be afraid to be wrong or make mistakes.
 
posted by Michael
 on December 19, 2006 #
 
Medium stupid: smart enough to understand what youre told.
 
posted by Andrew Yates
 on December 19, 2006 #
 
I dont understand this argument against minimum wage. If minimum wage versus employment was a simple inverse function, then why not lower minimum wage and solve unemployment! Oh wait
 
Anyone who believes in trickle-down economics yet is against raising minimum wage is a hypocrite.
 
posted by Andrew Yates
 on December 19, 2006 #
 
As Christopher Hayes points out in his genius article, Is A Little Economics A Dangerous Thing?,the uneducated American thinks raising the minimum wage is a pretty good idea  after all, people deserve to be paid more than $5 an hour. 
 
Im a bit confused.  Where exactly does Christopher Hayes say that the uneducated American thinks raising the minimum wage is a good idea or that Economic Prize winners support raising the minimum wage?
 
Also the title of the article is What We Learn When We Learn Economics.  Is a little economics a dangerous thing? is just the subtitle.
 
posted by Crimson
 on December 20, 2006 #
 
Where exactly say Economic Prize winners support raising the minimum wage?
 
Crimson, is in the second page of the article. Look for in fact, in October, 650 economists, including five Nobel Laureates, signed a letter advocating an increase in the U.S. minimum wage to $8 an hour
 
You can read the letter here:
http://www.epi.org/content.cfm/minwagestmt2006
 
The article never mention that the uneducated American thinks raising the minimum wage is a pretty good idea.
 
posted by Sergio G.
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
For one picture of why an economist would sign that letter, theres this: http://gregmankiw.blogspot.com/2006/12/can-600-economists-all-be-wrong.html
And theres really only a dozen top-talent economists on that letter, not dozens, and most of them are not prize winners, assuming you mean Nobel prize winners, as the letters footnotes indicate. Im sure dozens have won some $500 prize from their grad school departments or whatever, but no one would actually care about those.
 
Id really like to see you engage economic policy discussions on the issues more, instead of your if I change the words it sounds like religion! and everyone who thinks this is medium stupid theories. For example, as Mankiw points out, the main issues that an economist would weigh in this discussion are whether or not a modest increase in the minimum wage will actually decrease employment, and whether there is a large enough group of people unable to make more than minimum wage who will be helped by it. Wikipedia has a (very incomplete) entry on the various empirical studies that have tackled these questions and its still unclear. You could weigh the methodology and results of these studies and come to either conclusion. But arguing that the people who disagree with you must be intellectually deficient is not the way problems are solved and arguments are settled among the intelligent and civilized.
 
posted by 
 on December 25, 2006 #
 
But the medium stupid American, the kind that gullibly watches the CBS Evening News, is convinced that Iraq is full of weapons of mass destruction that could blow our country to bits at any minute.  was a true sentence in 2003  today that same sentence would read: But the medium stupid American, the kind that gullibly watches the CBS Evening News, is convinced that victory in Iraq is a well defined achievable goal.  In the interest of truthiness i took out your mention of the New York Times because then you need a new catagory: medium stupid Plus.
 
Looking forward to your documentary !
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 17, 2006
 
Title: The Grim Meathook Future
 
In the technology industry we have a phrase. We call it the grim meathook future, after a brilliant piece by Joshua Ellis:
 
I think the problem is that the future, maybe for the first time since WWII, lies on the far side of an event horizon for us, because there are so many futures possible. Theres the wetware future, the hardware future, the transhumanist future, the post-rationalist (aka fundamentalist) future.
 
And then theres the future where everything just sort of keeps going on the way it has, with incremental changes, and technology is no longer the deciding factor in things. You dont need high tech to change the world; you need Semtex and guns that were designed by a Russian soldier fifty-odd years ago.
 
Meanwhile, most of the people with any genuine opportunity or ability to effect global change are too busy patting each other on the back at conventions and blue-skying goofy social networking tools that are essentially useless to 95% of the worlds population, who live within fifteen feet of everyone theyve ever known and have no need to track their fuck buddies with GPS systems. (This, by the way, includes most Americans, quite honestly.)
 
You cant blame them for this, because its fun and its a great way to travel and get paid, but it doesnt actually help solve any real problems, except the problem of media theory grad students, which the rest of the world isnt really interested in solving.
 
Feeding poor people is useful tech, but its not very sexy and it wont get you on the cover of Wired. Talk about it too much and you sound like an earnest hippie. So nobody wants to do that.
 
They want to make cell phones that can scan your personal measurements and send them real-time to potential sex partners. Because, you know, the fucking Japanese teenagers love it, and Japanese teenagers are clearly the smartest people on the planet.
 
The upshot of all of this is that the Future gets divided; the cute, insulated future that Joi Ito and Cory Doctorow and you and I inhabit, and the grim meathook future that most of the world is facing, in which they watch their squats and under-developed fields get turned into a giant game of Counterstrike between crazy faith-ridden jihadist motherfuckers and crazy faith-ridden American redneck motherfuckers, each doing their best to turn the entire world into one type of fascist nightmare or another.
 
Of course, nobody really wants to talk about that future, because its depressing and not fun and doesnt have Fischerspooner doing the soundtrack. So everybody pretends they dont know what the future holds, when the unfortunate fact is that  unless we start paying very serious attention  it holds what the past holds: a great deal of extreme boredom punctuated by occasional horror and the odd moment of grace.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 17, 2006
 
On first glance Im not sure I understand whats so brilliant about this piece. Firstly, I dont like its tone which follows a certain tendency Ive been noticing regularly, ie everytime a writer wants to really, really tell-it-like-it is, s/he injects a couple of variations of fuck and other short tracks to purported down-to-earthness. Secondly, one has to be quite insulated to find Ellis observations anything but obvious. So he argues that the entertainment branch of technology hasnt immediate ramifications for starving people? Get out, Id never have thought of that!
 
posted by FrF
 on December 17, 2006 #
 
Meanwhile, most of the people with any genuine opportunity or ability to effect global change are too busy patting each other on the back
 
The piece is brilliant because it strokes the ego of the more reflective blogger attending conferences sponsored by WIRED magazine. If only these genius social networking theorists would stop wasting their abilities on studying how FACEBOOK affects college dating, and instead applied their gifts to global economic and regional conflict issues, the world might have a chance at being a better place. However, they dont, so we are stuck with perpetual bloodshed and famine. Oh well.
 
posted by Master's Degree in Science
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
Im disappointed that Aaron characterizes the piece as brilliant.
 
In fact we are doing stuff and when you can look back over a reasonable span of experience (say 75 years or so) you will find the articles pesscynicism laughable.
 
Muhammad Ali is way hipper than Joshua Ellis, as is the 95 year old woman I play pinochle at the Senior Center with on Friday afternoons.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
While I appreciate the bracing point he makes, ultimately its a rant. Rhetoric like the following does not strike me as particularly reasonable:
 
between crazy faith-ridden jihadist motherfuckers and crazy faith-ridden American redneck motherfuckers, each doing their best to turn the entire world into one type of fascist nightmare or another.
 
I also object to the notion that the sort of technology were talking about has little bearing on the problems of the worlds poor. For example, letting fuck buddies drive widespread adoption of GPS eventually makes it cheap enough to be applicable to, say, African food distribution networks. Mobile phones are currently revolutionizing commerce in parts of Africa, where corrupt/incompetent local utilities dont provide reliable land lines or electricity.
 
(BTW, anyone looking for last-minute Xmas gifts should consider a Kiva gift certificate, which provides collateral-free microcredit to entrepreneurs in developing countries.)
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
While I appreciate the bracing point he makes, ultimately its a rant.
 
Whats wrong with rants? I love em.
 
And do you really think that African food distribution networks are waiting until we testmarket GPS on Japanese teenagers? I really fail to see the logic in that.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
I dont understand the logic of your question, and what you mean by waiting. I guess relatively poor Africans waited for the price of mobile phones to come down to a certain level, but once they did, they benefitted from it, even though the phones werent marketed with poor Africans in mind. You might object to the trickle-down-ness this represents, but thats how all material progress happens: things that start out as luxuries eventually become commodities.
 
And the problem with rants is their often irrational component. Is Ellis seriously suggesting that the worlds poor have much to fear from faith-ridden Americans? Would that include people who donate to Catholic Charities?
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
Give the guy a bit of credit. This is just the Jihad vs. McWorld or dystopia vs. utopia story, hes not saying anything particularly earth shatteringly new, just phrasing it in an emotionally resonant way.
 
I agree that the focus on web/tech people as the distracted saviors is mistaken, but theyre his audience. so
 
I also suppose that I disagree in some deep intellectual sense with the notion that technology cant change things, because my take on civilization is that society is the substrate on top of technology mediated by economics. But hes focused on the very short term change in technology here, not change in the civilizational-level dialectical sense.
 
posted by Firas
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
And do you really think that African food distribution networks are waiting until we testmarket GPS on Japanese teenagers? I really fail to see the logic in that.
 
You cant see the logic in it because thats not what was said/implied. Rants about rants are amusing but whats getting clouded here is that 100 years isnt really all that long a time - except when theres a race against oblivion (and even that is too loaded a term).
 
If you think Muhammad Ali was waiting for anything you havent paid attention - oh, I forgot, you werent around when he was Cassius Clay and now a main street in Louisville is named after him.
 
Barack Obama for  who cares? the real issue is whether our disdain for borders/nation-states and your recently reinforced indifference to money will triumph over some temporary pragmatism about how will we pay for all this?
 
Please re-read Buckys Critical Path and get back into the dream - it would help if you moved to a place where theres decent air to breathe, water to drink. I still have a spare room.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on December 19, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 15, 2006
 
Title: Tips for Better Thinking
 
Go to the library and youll find whole bookcases full of books on how to write better. But look for a book on how to think better and youll be busy for a while. (The only major book I could find  Crimes Against Logic  was a dreadful little series of basic logical fallacies dressed up in political polemic.)
 
It cant be that writing is more important than thinking. While Ive met many people who cant exactly write, it seems that just about everyone has to think  even writers. Nor do I think its that the task is really harder. We know very little about the internal process of writing, so writing guides consist mostly of good and bad examples, along with some general rules. Surely one could do the same for thought.
 
Perhaps the answer is that there isnt such a thing as good thinking. But the case for it seems even stronger than the case for good writing. Good thinking is that which better helps us approximate reality  avoiding fallacies, missteps of judgment, faulty assumptions, misunderstandings, and needless fillips and loops.
 
And yet the subjects plain importance, I can find scarcely an article that takes up the topic. Where is the piece that savages bad thinking the way Mark Twain savaged Fenimore Coopers aimless writing or the way Orwell went after political abuses of English or, for more modern readers, Matt Taibbis dissection of Thomas Friedmans latest book? It seems like it would be just as fun  if not more  to watch a gifted writer slice and dice up a convoluted thought until it becomes apparent that its actually meaningless.
 
The closest I can think of is Chomskys review of B.F. Skinner (an unfair match-up if there ever was one  a bit like using a blow torch to clear off a dust mite). But Chomskys attacking Skinners ideas rather specifically (and, more generally, exposing the political implications behind bogus science); the essay is certainly not one in a series of examples of how to think better.
 
As one gets more skilled, the opportunities for improvement become less available  apparently because fewer people are interested in improving. The library gives free courses in how to read better, but these are for people who have trouble reading long books, not for those who already can but want to continue to improve. And there are courses in improving your writing, but they generally only get you from awful to serviceable, and not from serviceable to great. The same seems true of thinking  there are many books on fairly blatant logical fallacies to avoid, but few on more subtle improvements to thought.
 
And yet, at least with writing, people try. There are English courses in schools, taught by some of the greatest writers of the generation. And journalists can semi-apprentice themselves by freelancing before great editors, who slice and dice their prose until it shines. Yet Ive never seen a class or an apprenticeship in thinking, except perhaps incidentally.
 
The reason, I think, is because no one is thinking bigger. But that means theres plenty of opportunity. The fields wide open, folks.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 15, 2006
 
Maybe its because its hard to work with thought alone that we need to give it form. Its difficult to collaborate and share with others without some kind of notation. Its also hard to gauge improvement without comparison.
 
Philosophy courses (with a good teacher, anyway) can help improve your thinking, but mostly by way of improving your writing. Good writing is good thinking.
 
The Tao Te Ching is helpful in considering these tensions between form and the formless.
 
posted by John
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Ive seen the book youre looking for. Its a 99 cent composition book.
 
When I write, it doesnt just come out. Sometimes I rewrite dozens of times. 500 words can take a day. Sometimes I change my mind about the topic entirely in the process. Peter Elbow, in Writing Without Teachers, says you should throw away your first draft. Delete it and start over. Then, if its not great the second time, throw that out. Because writing is thinking, youll have learned something between drafts. Starting over, you get to explore what you learned in previous drafts, with the untrammeled potential of an empty page.
 
Maybe, in the larger sense, Im proposing that the part of your brain that would learn to think is not going to do it by reading a book about thinking. Maybe it needs to engage itself with some output mechanismwriting, for example.
 
posted by Carl Tashian
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_thinking
 
posted by pjz
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
I second Carls mention of Peter Elbows Writing Without Teachers. And Elbows Writing With Power.  Books on thinking?  Edward de Bono. (http://www.edwdebono.com/) Marilyn vos Savants Brain Building.  And theres the classic, How To Solve It, by G. Polya.  Drive Yourself Sane, by Kodish and Kodish (general semantics primer). Basic texts in cybernetics?  Systems thinking?  Phenomenology?  Philosophical skepticism/pyrrhonism/zetetic?
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
I find the skeptic literature, starting with Francis Bacons idols but now often influenced by cognitive science, is very good for learning how to avoid mistakes in thinking, though not so great for learning how to come up with great ideas.
 
Thomas Gilovich 
How we know what isnt so
 
Massimo Piattelli-Palmarini 
Inevitable illusions: how mistakes of reason rule the mind
 
Richard Nisbett, Lee Ross 
Human inference
 
Michael Shermer 
Why people believe weird things: pseudoscience, superstition, and other confusions of our time
 
posted by Joseph Reagle
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
In school, the two most influential courses on my ways of thinking were those relating to formal logic, and those relating to methodology in the social sciences.  Just learning about conceptualization and operationalization of the concepts in language was enough to shake up half of my worldview.
 
posted by Antonio
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
I agree that some of the recent literature ostensibly about skepticism might be at least part of what youre looking for. They might include more examples of bad thinking than good, but not exclusively. In addition to Shermers Why People Believe Weird Things, I recommend Carl Sagans last two books, The Demon-Haunted World and Billions and Billions.
 
posted by Peter Collopy
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
Well, the academic discipline youre groping for is Philosophy. But I think youre missing  or at least misphrasing  the point. Pretty much all courses in anything are courses in thinking first and their ostensible subject second. Many of them may be bad courses in thinking  many may indeed be courses in bad thinking  but the processes of learning and thinking are so closely interwoven there will never be a rule that splits one from the other.
 
The way to learn to think, is to think; practice doesnt make perfect, but it clumsily strives in that general direction. And because thinking about thinking gets tediously circular, the practice often involves learning about other stuff and thinking about that.
 
Certainly, there are lot of structures for thinking that have already been mapped out that it would be foolhardy to ignore  philosophy again  and an inquiring thinker might well want to investigate those. But thinking is  for all its highfalutin qualities  profoundly empirical. You just have to think it and see.
 
posted by matt
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
I would argue that Richard Feynman spent the latter part of his career trying very hard to teach people how to think better. His essay on skepticism and scientism (Cargo Cult Science, http://wwwcdf.pd.infn.it/~loreti/science.html), his participation on textbook committees, and his participation in the Challenger inquest were all at least as much attempts to show the value of rationality and penetrating thought to the larger public as anything else. He had a very hands-on view of how the work of theoretical physics is done, which is probably a large part of why he was so successful (on his blackboard at his death: Know how to solve every problem that has been solved.).
 
Which leads me to a very useful little book and the larger idea it points towards: How To Solve Mathematical Problems by Wayne Wickelgren (http://www.amazon.com/Solve-Mathematical-Problems-Wayne-Wickelgren/dp/0486284336). My dad once gave me an earlier edition of this work (called, more simply, How to Solve Problems), and its become something of a touchstone of mine over the years. The larger idea is that mathematics is, in its way, crystallized thought, and that time spent mastering the intricacies of mathematics generally makes one a better thinker and writer. Im still sort of mathtarded, but Im gradually (re)learning a lot of math, and I find its very helpful both in my software work and in my ability to think clearly about the world.
 
In the Classical Greek worldview, rhetoric, logic, and mathematics were all inextricably linked. I dont think they were wrong.
 
posted by Forrest L Norvell
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
http://www.esgs.org/uk/art/sands.htm
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
Hmm to me, it seems, a good way to think better is to not fall in love with your own way of thinking. To learn to share. To learn to reflect.
 
Our (sic) school systems can be of great help in learning that skill. Just throw a bunch of kids together, and see how they learn to cope with themselves.
 
In a way the whole blogosphere reminds that same scenario. Self-organizing systems, and all that
 
posted by Tommi Raivio
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
You have obviously not looked very hard for books on the subject; Ed de Bono has written dozens of them.  His entire subject is thinking better.
 
posted by Mike
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
Aaron there is always, Barons Thinking and Deciding. If you want more a laundry list of human errors in thinking there is Judgment under Uncertainty
 
posted by Eric Leons
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
The book you are looking for is The Thinkers Toolkit: 14 Powerful Techniques for Problem Solving by Morgan Jones. Jones and his team teach from this book at their Critical Thinking seminars. I re-read chapters every few months. Another good book is Labyrinths of Reason: Paradox, Puzzles, and the Frailty of Knowledge by William Poundstone. Just search for them at Amazon and order them up. These are both on Critical Thinking and Decision Making whereas a lot of Ed de Bonos works focus on team thinking and brainstormingalso good but different.
 
posted by Ashley Grayson
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
Ok, lots of books are mentioned already.  Ill add some more sources for consideration: Goldratts Thinking Processes: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thinking_process http://www.focusedperformance.com/articles/toctp2.html
 
posted by Ivan Kurmanov
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
Dont assume nobody has had your idea just because you cant find any books on it at the library.  No matter what your idea is, its very likely that someones had it before you.  And thats especially likely when your idea is very general in nature, such as Aarons idea of a book on how to think better.  As others note, logic is the discipline that covers that ground.  If you cant find any books on logic in your library, you need to check to make sure you actually are in a library.  Step one: Examine your surroundings.  Are there canned goods and grocery carts around?  Thats the supermarket, not the library!  Look for the exit and try again.
 
posted by david
 on December 17, 2006 #
 
Lookup Edward de Bono. Hes written several books on thinking.
 
posted by ucf
 on December 17, 2006 #
 
ETs started a thread on this.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
The books about thinking are under Philosophy.
 
posted by Eric Bieschke
 on December 19, 2006 #
 
Aaron, the subject youre looking for is Critical Thinking. And libraries (and amazon) have many books on this subject. More generally, philosophy at its best is the discipline concerned primarily with thinking critically and examining the unexamined. More generally still, a university education is supposed to teach the art of thinking first, as applied to some specific discipline of thought (second).
 
posted by gill bates
 on December 20, 2006 #
 
Few courses teach much about better thinking. At best they select for better thinkers. Often they simply select for the best breeding. This isnt a ready-to-wear tip, but, if you want to learn how to think better, the best advice I can offer to a bright, motivated young person is to find someone who will work with you on a Moore Method course.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
Not exactly what you are thinking of, but still a useful thinking tool, is Strong Inference
 
http://256.com/gray/docs/strong_inference.html
 
posted by Eadwacer
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
I love that Matt Taibbi review of The World is Flat! Heres more Taibbi on Friedman:
 
http://www.nypress.com/16/20/news&columns/cage.cfm
 
Quote:
 
there are any number of at least superficially plausible ways of saying that you need civilization and education before you can have the vote. But Friedman, desperate to seem like the hip computer-age priest of globalization he has worked so hard to market himself as, decides instead to say that you need software (free institutions) before you can have hardware (elections).
 
But in the real world, does software naturally come before hardware? Does that make sense? Youre still scratching your head over that one when Friedman zooms into his next mangled metaphor. With Saddams iron fist now removed, he writes, the U.S. must help an authentically Iraqi moderate center emerge and sink roots. The correct word here is lifted, not removed. Friedman has left a giant Iron Saddam, minus one fist, hovering over Iraq, while the half-vegetable, half-human Iraqi center first emerges and then sinks roots.
 
posted by david mathers
 on December 26, 2006 #
 
Where is the piece that savages bad thinking?  Well, anything in Plato.  Socrates spent his life savaging bad thinking.  Also, a great deal of the research literature in any academic discipline.  Along the same lines, the Crooked Timber blog regularly does the same thing.
 
posted by Kragen Sitaker
 on December 26, 2006 #
 
Check out any number of books by Gerald Weinberg:  An Introduction to General Systems Thinking is the book used in college courses.
 
posted by Dave R
 on December 28, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 14, 2006
 
Title: Think Bigger: A Generalist Manifesto
 
Our world is full of forces pushing us towards specificity. Open a newspaper and its divided into topic sections. Go to the bookstore and its divided into subject categories. Go to school and the classes are all in separate fields. Get a degree and you have to study in a particular major. Get a job and you have to work at a particular task.
 
The world needs specificists, of course, but it also needs generalists. And we see precious few of those. Its not hard to see why: try to do something big and everyone will try to talk you out of it.
 
Thats impossible, theyll say. Do that and youll only drive yourself crazy.
 
If that worked, dont you think someone else would have done it?
 
With all due respect, what makes you the expert on that subject?
 
Tell someone youre working on a dissertation about the mating dance of the East African dung beetle and they wont bat an eye. It would be the height of impoliteness to ask Is that really worth spending three years on?  even if thats exactly what youre thinking. But set your sights a little bit higher and people have no problem knocking you down. Come on, theyll say, furrowing their brow, do you really think youre going to be able to pull something like that off?
 
Dont listen to them. People are afraid of grandeur; it challenges the status quo. But you shouldnt be. Look up more should be your motto; Think bigger your mantra.
 
The first step is to recognize your place in things. If you study beetle mating habits, look at the larger mating patterns your studies fall into, look at the big picture of animal behavior, ask where you fit in the bigger question of what it means for an animal to behave. This is what I mean by Look up more.
 
But if you do thisand I believe you willthen youll find it hard to stay satisfied with your dung beetle project. Youll start wondering if you could move on to bigger things. Perhaps just a little bit bigger at firstanalyzing a few more types, discussing a few more implicationsbut soon youll notice that others have left the field wide open for the truly big picture stuff and youll start wondering why its not there that you should stake your claim. This is what I mean by Think bigger.
 
Sure, at first itll be frightening biting off more than youve ever had to chew. But the fear will soon give way to exhilaration and the extra work involved will be paid for in the additional notoriety, in the joy of knowing that youve made a real difference. After all, do you really want to spend the rest of your life studying dung beetles?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 14, 2006
 
Im just wondering when reddit will be back up
 
posted by Jeremy Mims
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Im just wondering when reddit will be back up
 
posted by 
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Im also wondering when Reddit will be back up but also, I realized how much Reddit meant in my life when I realized how ANNOYING it was when it wasnt there anymore! heh =P
 
posted by Andrew Yates
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
The great generalists in the world are all experienced at specificity.  The worlds recognized generalists are the University Presidents (most of which werent career professors), philanthropists, renaissance men, etc.
 
If you study the mating habits of the East African Dung Beetle really well, you learn a ton about more than just the thesis topic.  You need to understand geography, the impact of climate, the biology of phermones possibly, evolution, taxonomies/norms, genetics (okay a stretch), etc.  And if you want to make a living out of it you need to understand project management (i.e. when to publish it), networking (as in finding someone interested in reviewing/publishing/funding it), marketing (i.e. making it sound sexy enough for the broader world), etc.
 
And if the mating habits of the dung beetle so firmly implanted in your mind happen to be applicable to helping guys/girls in a bar make better choices about who to choose.then youve made the world a much better places.
 
So, do specialize.  Just do it really wellWhich requires you to become a generalist.
 
posted by Chris
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
And let me be the first to warn you that the entomologists might crawl all over you on this one! (ahem. sorry.)
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
This post reminds me of a condensed version of Richard Hammings You and Your Research, which, funny enough, Paul Graham also has a copy of on his Essays section.
 
http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/YouAndYourResearch.html is the original version I read.
 
posted by Vitorio Miliano
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
The urge to generalism is spot on except for the citation of notoriety as a positive.
 
Get over that.
 
Love.
 
posted by William Loughborough
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Dont forget, though, that to do great things, one must also not be afraid to study a lot of the dirty details as you said in The Genius is in the Details as long as you dont forget to look up every once in awhile.
 
Great post. :)
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 13, 2006
 
Title: The Goog Life: how Google keeps employees by treating them like kids
 
Title: 1 is definitely the best thing. I spend a lot less time in meetings, dealing with support issues, talking to management, etc. than I did at my previous job.
 
I was talking with a friend the other day about that perennial subject of conversation in the Valley, Google. And finally she gave me the clue that made the whole place make sense. Its about infantilizing people, she explained. Give them free food, do their laundry, let them sit on bouncy brightly-colored balls. Do everything so that they never have to grow up and learn how to live life on their own.
 
And when you look at it that way, everything Google does makes a sick sort of sense.
 
Not a whole lot has changed since the last time I visited Google. The campus is bigger  the buildings across the street, instead of being reserved for lawyers and other lowlifes, are now being used by the engineering staff as well, to keep up with Googles nonstop growth. And the employees seem a little less excited about things than the last time I was there. Nobody says Were on a mission to change the world! anymore. Now they say, Yeah, Im just going to stick around here another six months until my options vest. and I kind of want to transfer out of my group but I worry that all the other groups are worse.
 
But the two blatant changes to the campus are a large, terribly fake-looking replica of SpaceShipOne hanging in the middle of the main building and a replica dinosaur skeleton standing outside. Its as if this place is being decorated by seven-year-olds, a friend comments. It also reminds me of Robert Reichs comment about Newt Gingrich: His office is adorned with figurines of dinosaurs, as you might find in the bedrooms of little boys who dream of one day being huge and powerful.
 
The dinosaurs and spaceships certainly fit in with the infantilizing theme, as does the hot tub-sized ball pit that Googlers can jump into and throw ball fights. Everyone I know who works there either acts childish (the army of programmers), enthusiastically adolescent (their managers and overseers), or else is deeply cynical (the hot-shot programmers). But as much as they may want to leave Google, the infantilizing tactics have worked: theyre afraid they wouldnt be able to survive anywhere else.
 
Google hires programmers straight out of college and tempts them with all the benefits of college life. Indeed, as the hiring brochures stress, the place was explicitly modeled upon college. At one point, I wondered why Google didnt just go all the way and build their own dormitories. After all, werent the late-night dorm-room conversations with others who were smart like you one of the best parts of college life? But as the gleam wears off the Google, I can see why its no place anyone would want to hang around for that long. Even the suburban desert of Mountain View is better.
 
Googles famed secrecy doesnt really do a very good job of keeping information from competitors. Those who are truly curious can pick up enough leaks and read enough articles to figure out how mostly everything works. But what it does do is create an aura of impossibility around the place. People read the airbrushed versions of Google technologies in talks and academic papers and think that Google has some amazingly large computer lab with amazingly powerful technology. But hang around a Googler long enough and youll hear them complain about the unreliability of GFS and how they dont really have enough computers to keep up with the load.
 
Its always frightening when you see how the sausage actually gets made, explains a product manager. And thats exactly what the secrecy is supposed to prevent. The rest of the world sees Google as this impenetrable edifice with all the mysteries of the world inside (I hear once youve worked there for 256 days they teach you the secret levitation, explains xkcd) while the select few inside the walls know the truth  there is no there there  and are bound together by this burden.
 
Such a strategy may have worked in the early days, when Googlers were a select and special few, but as the company grows larger and employees identification with it grows thinner, Google has to step up their efforts to acculturate. And thats where the life-size dinosaur replicas come in. Enjoy being huge and powerful while you can. Because, like the dinosaurs, this too will pass.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 13, 2006
 
yawn
 
I work at Google, am fully vested, and could retire tomorrow if I wanted to.  I continue to work here because it actually is the most interesting place in the world to work at.
 
Once again youve written a sensationalistic piece based on cursory research that only serves to confirm your preconceived notions about the world.  Only this time, I dont suspect youre wrong, I know you are.
 
Or, maybe Im just to infantalized to see the truth.
 
posted by googler
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
youll hear them complain 
  about the unreliability of GFS
 
Yeah, those losers with their imperfect uptime.  By the way, reddit is down right now.  Yes, seriously.  Could you look into that?
 
posted by Anon
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
Reddit has been down for most, if not all, of the day.  Ironic, given the amazon downtime article on reddit recently.
 
posted by Anon2
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
Yeah, the only reason Im reading your blog is because reddit is down ;P Maybe reddit should use gmail as a database.
 
As it happens, I just visited Google Kirkland the other day. I have to say it was a bit creepy; the cleanness and brightness was overdone, and the abundance of lavalamps seemed affected. Our host mentioned several times that the furniture is all from the childrens section of Ikia. Hopefully none of this is in violation of the NDA I signed to get in.
 
Still looks like an awesome place to work, though. ;)
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
Any time that you start cooking meals for people and putting on shuttles youre risking the accusation of  infantilizing them. But is that a good reason not to do it? It would be sad world if companies didnt offer these things out of a sense of tough love or something.
 
Google has always tried to project an image of somewhere fun to work, with the exercise balls, the bright colors and the Segways. I liked the idea of SpaceShip One when I heard about it. Weve lost all sense of adventure about space. The X prize was the most exciting news for some time and its good that we recognize that.
 
Certainly Google doesnt perform magic in their labs, its just C++ code. But, none the less, it does seem to work very, very well. The air of mystique is probably overblown, but its not totally hollow.
 
posted by John Savage
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
Oh, and how could I forget, the tips for unit testing in the bathroom stalls.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
Oh, I thought it was Perl code. And with YouTube, now a bit more Python.
 
posted by Tommi
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
googler: You havent pointed to a single thing in my piece that you think is wrong. Ive spoken to over a dozen of friends of mine who work or have worked at Google and visited numerous times and this is the impression they give. Maybe this is the best job the tech industry currently has to offer, but thats no reason to set our sights so low.
 
(And, for completeness, I dont see how the piece is sensationalist, the research is cursory, or which notions in the piece were preconceived.)
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
And seriously, what does the fact that Conde Nasts DNS servers were screwed up for a bit have to do with this piece?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
People always seem to forget that dinosaurs ruled the Earth for much longer than humans can confidently expect to.
 
Recruitment is costly. All companies try to reduce the chances of their employees leaving, usually in far more egregious ways than youre suggesting here. Isnt what you characterize as infantilization just an expression of how wed all like to be?
 
Im not at all wide-eyed about Google  and at roughly twice your age, Aaron, I have my own perspective on the infantile  but as a company they do seem to try to give their geek employees what they want. How does that qualify as sick? Especially in light of the working circumstances of the vast majority of people on Earth
 
Its pretty churlish to complain that a job is so cushy it fails to prepare people for the harsh reality of marginally less cushy jobs elsewhere.
 
posted by matt
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
Interesting article, Aaron. I cant remember where, but someone was describing the environment at most valley startups like a fraternity. Lots of guys, lots of toys, lots of fart jokes.
 
posted by Sam
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
re: sensationalist
 
youve been building it. look at titles you give to each entry. its not restrained rather its tasteless and cheap. Your way of putting titles, placing (not much of) analysis and putting conclusions can just be called sensationalist style.
 
intent and style can and shall match. esp if you are typing this much.
 
posted by change might be necessary
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
You havent pointed to a single thing in my piece that you think is wrong. Ive spoken to over a dozen
 
Whats wrong?:
 
Whats sensationalist?
 
But as much as they may want to leave Google, the infantilizing tactics have worked: theyre afraid they wouldnt be able to survive anywhere else.
 
I mean come on Aaron!  Is the most parsimonious explanation for Googles retention ability really that, through some sort of sick psy-ops program, it has transformed us into hollow [wo]men who can no longer think or act for themselves?  Wouldnt the explanation that we all get to do meaningful work and get rewarded for it be simpler?
 
Whats preconceived?
 
Whats cursory?
 
I have no interest in brow-beating you into abandoning your position (that would be hopeless, Im just writing here so that your other readers hear the other side of the story), but it blows my mind that having an employee of google tell you that you are off the mark doesnt even give you pause.
 
Aaron, you are too young to go down the path of intellectual totalitarianism (to borrow a phrase from DeLong), but having read your blog since you were at Stanford, the changes are undeniable to me.  You are no longer seeking the truth, you are only seeking support for your own prophetic vision of the truth.
 
posted by googler
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Hey man reddit has been down all day. What gives?
 
posted by Shawn MacFarland
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Im confused whats so wrong with trying to keep your employees happy? Theres nothing inheriently noble about doing your own laundry, cooking your own meals, or working in a professional office.
 
How would Google be a better company if it eliminated all of the college, whimisical life perks you listed? What is it about being traditionally professional make a company better?
 
posted by Andrew Yates
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Im a relatively new Googler.  I joined here not to get rich, and I doubt Ill be a zillionaire anytime soon.  Im here because I greatly enjoy what Im doing, I have an enormous amount of respect and appreciation for and  in many cases  friendships with my colleagues.
 
If helping to reduce carbon emissions AND providing Googlers with safe, restful, free, and efficient transportation is infantile, then by golly, just gimme a pacifier now.  If the bouncy ball I sometimes sit on or stretch with is babyish, then just throw a baby bottle under my lowerback and be done with it.
 
Amazingly delicious free meals on campus?  I dont think infants would appreciate the tastes.   The fact that they are a much beloved perk AND have engineers happily NOT spending time driving and waiting off campus for food that sounds like a pretty sensible, adult benefit to me.
 
Basically, Aaron, all the things youve denigrated as infantile  the bright colors, appreciated perks, etc.  strike me as being good for employees, good for business, just, well, good for people.  Frankly, Im shocked why more companies havent adopted such pound-wise, penny-foolish ideas (hint: the bouncyball I sit on cost $50, cheaper than nearly any office chair; and while I dont think I should disclose the per-Googler costs of our fab food services, lets just say that its one of many things here that provides value FAR in excess of the cost).
 
I find it both interesting and disturbing that supposedly ALL the current and former Googlers youve chatted with seem to lack happiness with, much less passion for their job.  Perhaps unsurprisingly, the vast majority of colleagues I have chatted with seem to be, on the whole, extremely pleased with the stuff theyre working on and the colleagues they work with.  I guess we tend to interact with folks who reflect our own feelings, values, and temperment and  given the stultifyingly bleak and often cynical tone of your blog lately  I suppose it shouldnt be surprising that those you interact with tend to be generally dissatisfied and unhappy with their lot (workwise and likely otherwise).
 
Given this post and your history of posts, Aaron, Ill simply close by encouraging you (sincerely) to cheer up, embrace life, see the good side of things a bit more often but Im guessing youll just find that to be patronizing and manipulative [sigh].
 
Regards,
Adam, who learned the hard way in college that always fighting, always questioning, always doubting and second-guessing makes for a pretty miserable existence and countenance
 
P.S.  I also thought the spaceship and dinosaur were way lame, but  in chatting with my engineering colleagues  I found I was absolutely in the minority on this.  Apparently, others derive a sense of wonderment and pleasure from such objects, and subtlely comparing these folks with Newt, Aaron, is neither particularly edifying nor appropriate.
 
posted by Adam
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Hey Aaron  if youre going to try to make an interesting argument, thats cool and ill listen to it, but you lose a lot of your credibility by making personal judgements like this:
 
Or generalizations like this:
 
Really?  You know what everyone at Google says and thinks?
 
The thing is, i agree that Google tries very hard to keep its employees happy, and it does so with a  rather young personality, and one could discuss whether thats a good approach or not.  But you really kinda destroyed your own argument here.
 
posted by Ka-Ping Yee
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
I guess we tend to interact with folks who 
  reflect our own feelings, values, and 
  temperment I suppose it shouldnt be surprising 
  that those you interact with tend to be 
  generally dissatisfied and unhappy with 
  their lot (workwise and likely otherwise).
 
Bingo.
 
posted by Anon
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
When was the last time you clicked on an Adsense link? I did my last accidental adsense click about 1.5 years back, Google and the adsense site owner possibly got few cents each..i dont know how the poor advertiser benefited from my accidental click through.
 
Recently I visited a cyber cafe frequented by relatively inexperienced internet users. I saw lots of people using google search, yahoo and google free e-mail, yahoo and msn chat clients. The two hours i spent observing cyber cafe users, i did not see single Adwords or Adsense click!!! People going from Google SERP page to adsense infested MFA pages are clicking the back-button in no time, looks like now most people can easily identify the MFA pages! Then who else is clicking on all those adsense links?
 
Did you know Google is owned by two jewish gentlemen!
 
posted by Anon
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
People always seem to forget that dinosaurs ruled the Earth for much longer than humans can confidently expect to.
 
Thats not even remotely a fair comparison.  Its not like there was a particular species of dinosaur that ruled for all those 160 million years.
 
Mammals would be a far better comparison.  And although we mammals still have a long ways to go to catch up to the dinosaurs, our 65 million years and counting of ruling is not too shabby.
 
posted by George W. Bush
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Go outside and get some sun.  Smileits okay.
 
Dont be that asshole sitting in the corner that takes pity on all those unfortunate blind souls that are trying to enjoy themselves.
 
posted by Bored Late
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
I dont know what I should and shouldnt say because of the NDA, but its probably okay to say Im married to a Googler. He hasnt been there too long, but the only problem weve had so far is that he never seems to want to come home!
 
Seriously, though, Ive seen a lot of articles that might be labeled sour grapes about Google lately. (Not to imply that yours is one of them - you made an effort to support your conclusions and it does sound as though you know some unhappy people, which is unfortunate.) The thing is, Ive seen my husband go through jobs at other corporations. Ive waited up for him on the nights when he was forced to work overtime on a doomed project. Ive been there for him while he struggled under the tyranny of dangerously ignorant management. Ive seen him waste weeks of his time because of thoughtless and fruitless penny-pinching. He started out so bright, so full of energy and zest for what he does, and over time I watched that energy and passion wilt under buzzing florescent lights in suffocating cubicles.
 
Corporate life in general is terribly depressing. I personally hate it and work independently. I love what I do and at least this way no one can take my enthusiasm away from me.
 
But thats exactly why I think what Google is doing is terribly important. More companies need to be that way. They need to be families who treat their employees like children - they take care of them. They reward them for their hard work. They encourage them to be creative, because they know (and you know, too) that it only takes one good idea to make a million dollars. Or a billion. Or an empire.
 
Ill say this: my husband has never been happier. For that, Im exceedingly grateful to Google. Theyve given him something that he deserves, that everyone deserves. I wish it were more widely available. I wish we all could be free to be children, to feel like its okay to laugh, to look forward to waking up, to nurture the bright and crazy ideas that wander through your head. That really doesnt sound like a bad world to me.
 
posted by Anon
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Hi, Can you please remove that antisemtic comment. Thanks.
 
posted by dan
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
I mean antisemitic
 
posted by dan
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
On acting childish, look up neoteny. It could be a smart strategy to keep their staff open minded.
 
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/12/10/magazine/10section3a.t-3.html?_r=1&oref=slogin
 
posted by John DOugan
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
I cant really comment on working for Google, as I never have and dont live in the right area. But I can comment on this:
 
But the two blatant changes to the campus are a large, terribly fake-looking replica of SpaceShipOne hanging in the middle of the main building
 
I find this hilarious. Because for the last year and a half, this is what my wife has been making. She works for a company called WonderWorks. They make spaceships, big and small for movies and Aerospace museums. They had the contract for the replicas.
 
The replicas were contracted by the XPrize Foundation. They were made from the original molds. Scale Composites did the graphics layout, who did the graphics for the original.
 
So if you find replica incredibly fake looking I suggest you never go see the real SpaceShipOne. You will find it incredibly fake looking as well.
 
posted by Jean-Paul Cardier
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
when i read this, i almost think of it as a good thing.  Joel Spolsky of Joel on software frequently says its a function of the manager to eliminate roadblocks from programmers in order to let them work.  Smooth out the chores and bumps in the road, almost like a secretary, but one that makes decisions, handles conflicts, etc. so you dont have to.
 
except at google, it sounds like the whole company culture is based on taking away distracting influences/worries such as i wonder how much the ___ is at the buffet today or i need to get my clothes drycleaned/fill up my tires
this sounds good.  programming is done only with focus and google seems to try its best to let its programmers focus on their work
 
posted by Patrick Braga-Henebry
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
MMmmmm did google take reddit down?
 
posted by AC
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
I have to say that this is one of the most interesting articles I have read about google for some time. I dont think they created infantilizing environment intentionally but it is really interesting to see this side of the google paradise too.
 
In fact this article reminds me quite much about many first bubble web companies (our company had free sodas and billiard table too)
 
What web 1.0 companies lacked however was Googles bottomless wallet :-)
 
cheers
Mikko
 
posted by mikkom
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Google is a monster. The new Microsoft. Dont let any of the hype fool you. Google, just like everyone else, cares about one thing and one thing only: money. And it is my belief that will be Googles ultimate undoing. Not surprised at anything they do. Keeping employees paranoid and happy is probably as good as any strategy for retention.
 
posted by Cori
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Reddit is down again. Sort it out.
 
posted by Another Anon
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Sour grapes, Sour grapes, Sour grapes.all those insiders and the visitors who said this about Googlethe best employer..I, a Googler, take leaves very, very reluctantly. I cant wait for monadys to get back to the electric atmosphere. We are taken care of, which helps and motivates us to give our best, and anyway we are the best. We can eat, have fun and work hard at the same timeto give the best products and service to our users.
 
posted by Neena
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
This xkcd comic is also appropriate.
 
posted by Anon
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Did they turned you down too?
 
posted by 
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
I would love for someone to cook my meals and do my laundry. Hell, rich people pay to have others do that for them  does that make rich people infantile? If we follow your line of reasoning, to become really adult, we should go back and work in the mills of Dickens industrializing England, or better yet go work in the sweat shops of todays third world countries. I mean, seriously, compared to that, were all infantile.
 
posted by Scott Goodwin
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
I agree Google is a fun place to be in. But what are these guys doing with all that freedom? I dont see any new products/services coming out. Apart from the basic search and gmail google has purchased every thing else. Those that google built is not popular. So what are all those Best Brains in the industry doing? I guess all the food is slowing them down.
 
posted by abc
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Google guy, are you really surprised by this article?  Aaron is always looking for flaws in others and sensationalizing crap nobody cares about.  He is a nerd thats mad he sold out his freedom to work in a cubicle which led to this article being posted.
 
posted by Lazy
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Hang in there Aaron; the criticism is worth it.
 
posted by Tony Morris
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
my buddy has been trying to convince me to join Google for a while now.
 
for those Googlers who posted above, I wonder at what stage they are in their tenure at google.
 
you cant trust people who just started working at a company.  everything is so fresh and new.  the real test is 1,2, 3 years into working there.  do you still love it?  could you work there forever?
 
as for my reasons why i wont apply to Google (at least not yet):
 
1) their MS-like arrogant attitude towards hiring.  i dont want to be quizzed on some bullshit stuff like HTTP Status Codes.  my buddy said he studied for weeks for the interview.  whats the point?  honestly, it seems beneath me.  (but I do understand the philosophy..)
 
2) wont be getting rich from stock options anymore, not anytime soon.   sure, if you get in now and work there 5 years, youve got a shot.
 
3) ive been working from home full-time at a kickass startup these last 6+ months.  G discourages working from home.  (this is the biggest reason for me, actually)
 
4) my own side projects are doing > $6k per month in revenue.
 
5) they wont let you code in Ruby on Rails or other obscure technologies like that which dont integrate well with the G Grid yet.
 
the guys from MeasureMap banged out a wicked app in a few months (in RoR), got bought by google, and are now spending years repurposing it in python so itll work with G GRid.
 
6)If you have any entrepreneurial spirt (like Aaron, w00t w00t)  why dont you 
 
 go out and build your own fing Google!!  (in your own mold)
 
My philosophy happens to be, do whatever you want, however you want, whenever you want, as long as it gets results.
 
Companies that require onsite too much remind me of managers who want to be my babysitter.  Why do you care where and when I work, as long as it gets done?  (its like they think just cuz youre in an office, youre actually coding or something.  we all know thats a huge load of BS)
 
posted by fez
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Sadly most of the commentators seem to have bought into the Google reality distortion field (G-RDF).
 
Aarons comment that programmers have the attitude:
 
Yeah, Im just going to stick around here another six months until my options vest. and I kind of want to transfer out of my group but I worry that all the other groups are worse.
 
rings very true.
 
Any company that grows fast inevitably has the corporate change that comes over things and its terribly difficult - impossible - to maintain a culture that pleases all of the people all of the time. This reminds me of the comments people had back in the day as MS turned the corner from everyone wants to work there to its a job and at my one hit startup we went through our own mini-version when we were acquired.
 
Here at Monster, which is the coolest big company culture Ive worked in, we have the same problem, were trying to improve things, its working, but you know  youll never be perfect, projects will get cancelled or duplicated  and everyone has their GFS is unstable pet complaints.
 
So Google isnt perfect and Aaron - kudos for cutting through the (G-RDF). I hope they keep fixing things well enough they can keep putting out products I like (and I do like them).
 
posted by Chris Knott
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
I find it very disturbing that, while its not OK to generalize about other groups (and with good reason), its OK to do so with geeks. For example, its not OK to think that women are less capable then man at any task, that African Americans are different than Caucasians, and so on, but everybody keeps ranting about how everyone who is technically proficient will drool all over a shiny toy, doesnt need anything except a cubicle and a computer, and lives only for true mastery of some machine.
 
Im appalled that programmers even respond to that kind of Pavlovian nonsense. But then again, most programmers are kids in, or fresh out of, college. They dont care about not getting as much money as their employers get off their asses (you know - the stuff you buy groceries with), they think a union is a bunch of bits stuck together, and they know nothing about burnout (and by the time they find out what burnout is, theyve already lost their job to somebody in, or fresh out of, college). This is a nice recursive pattern for you geeks to ponder. You know, like GNU, MICO and other acronyms like that.
 
Take a break from the brainwashing youve now started to perform on yourselves, go rent Office Space, and keep the movie in mind when you go to your next interview and get asked Where do you see yourself in 5 years?.
 
posted by Cynical Hot-Shot
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Atmospheres such as Googles are only infantilizing if one is willing to be infantilized by such measures. Your assertion is only true for people for whom it holds true.
 
Perhaps more clearly: good job perks only make you act like a kid if you havent already grown up. I have a job with a lot of perks approaching Googles level of spoiling (albeit with a much smaller budget), and it hasnt made me revert to a ten year old mindset. I actually have a much more balanced outlook on life here than I did in my last job, which was much more by-the-book, 9-to-5, and certainly had no perks comparable to Googles.
 
It may be dangerous to try and make deductions of causation here, especially if the sample set of Google employees includes people who arent already hardened by the rest of the world. I can certainly see a fresh college grad going in to Google and becoming literally incapable of survival in a suit-and-tie job.
 
For me, I could go back to the rest of the world, if I had to. Id hate every waking hour of my life, but I already hated it last time I did time in the corporate world.
 
Exposure to a really rich working environment spoils people, to be sure - Im spoiled as all hell, and Ive only been doing this for 8 months - but the fact that we dont want to go back to a regular job is not at all related to our ability to do so.
 
posted by Apoch
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Just a note - GMAIL was down in the UK today. 
If that happened for more than a few minutes, western civilisation would break down uncontrollably  has anyone written a novel about that yet?
Hmm, Id better keep this one to myself.
:-)
 
posted by jedtesco
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
my buddy has been trying to convince me to join Google for a while now.
 
for those Googlers who posted above, I wonder at what stage they are in their tenure at google.
 
you cant trust people who just started working at a company. everything is so fresh and new. the real test is 1,2, 3 years into working there. do you still love it? could you work there forever?
 
as for my reasons why i wont apply to Google (at least not yet):
 
1) their MS-like arrogant attitude towards hiring. i dont want to be quizzed on some bullshit stuff like HTTP Status Codes. my buddy said he studied for weeks for the interview. whats the point? honestly, it seems beneath me. (but I do understand the philosophy..)
 
Yeah, just like those damn universities that have those ridiculous assignments and exams to see if you know the material that you obviously know already.  Such arrogant tactics to evaluate their students.  Only Google is even more progressive and trying to figure out better ways to evaluate candidates daily.  Any constructive criticism goes a long way to make the process better.  Complaining about it just makes you seem like you didnt have the effort to be prepared for an interview.
 
2) wont be getting rich from stock options anymore, not anytime soon. sure, if you get in now and work there 5 years, youve got a shot.
 
Good.  I would be more interested in working with someone who is concerned with creating great software, as supposed to getting rich.
 
3) ive been working from home full-time at a kickass startup these last 6+ months. G discourages working from home. (this is the biggest reason for me, actually)
 
Im typing this from home right now.  Theyve actually been pretty cool about me working off site (and across the country) as I finish up my degree.
 
4) my own side projects are doing > $6k per month in revenue.
 
So you make a entry level programmers salary.  Great.
 
5) they wont let you code in Ruby on Rails or other obscure technologies like that which dont integrate well with the G Grid yet.
 
the guys from MeasureMap banged out a wicked app in a few months (in RoR), got bought by google, and are now spending years repurposing it in python so itll work with G GRid.
 
6)If you have any entrepreneurial spirt (like Aaron, w00t w00t)  why dont you 
 
 go out and build your own fing Google!! (in your own mold)
 
My philosophy happens to be, do whatever you want, however you want, whenever you want, as long as it gets results.
 
Companies that require onsite too much remind me of managers who want to be my babysitter. Why do you care where and when I work, as long as it gets done? (its like they think just cuz youre in an office, youre actually coding or something. we all know thats a huge load of BS)
 
And he talks about how Google treats us like children.  This has got to be one of the more childish sentiments Ive read on this thread.  The point of being onsite is not so managers can babysit you, its so that you can have the opportunity to interact with some of the most brilliant minds that the industry has to offer.  The fact that Im able to consult with the worlds  authority on many of the technologies that I work with makes my work all the more better in the end.     At Google, anyone could come in with an idea, and if it is a truly good idea can get the support of the largest, most robust computing infrastructure in the world.  Who decides whether an idea is viable?  The community of Google employees, not one manager or top exec.  Thats a pretty sweet deal for an entrepreneurial spirited person if you ask me.
 
posted by anon googler
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
methinks Aaron hit a nerve here, heh.
 
posted by Sam
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
The google life is an attempt to provide a utopian atmosphere for creative and productive work. However, it is clear that utopian working environments differ from person to person. Moreover people who think that an environment will be a utopia often find the reality to be insufficient for their needs.
 
Thus your insulting and speculative article is a reflection of the fact that a carefree playful atmosphere is not to everyones liking or to their best interests.
 
The idea that work can be carefree and playful, while at the same time remaining productive, is fairly new. It arrises from lowering social requirements for conformity to a masculine and professional norm, as well as the plenty provided by spectacular profits.
 
The conflicting attitudes here can be described by their architypes, The Suits and The Birkenstocks. For people of type S, Googles work environment is childish, lacking in discipline, and unlikely to motivate. For people of type B it is liberating, inspiring, and likely to produce comradery and creativity.
 
Now, to be fair, these are the extremes, and Google is actively trying to take the best of both worlds and mix them. The face that Google represents however looks much more like a type B workplace than type S and leaves itself open to these kinds of critiques. The reality, on the otherhand, is one where the individual is asked to conform to rigid coding guidelines and quickly produce stable and useful code. In a word, it is intense.
 
What makes Google special, as with all businesses, is the core group of people who began it. They combined an unusual disregard for the conformity of the business world, with a love of life, and an intense intelligence and passion to change the world in a realizable way. This is a very strange mix of libralism, daring, intelligence and ability.
 
What you have latched onto, the way Google treats its employees, is how the initial Googlers wanted to be treated themselves and how they worked best themselves.
 
Confronted with plenty many people lose motivation (myself included) and thus retire when they can. Others when confronted with a liberal facade assume a libral work ethic and are thus turned off by the reality. Still others, like yourself, are personally insulted by the way they would be treated at the company, and see personal independance (in all things) as a virtue.
 
Of course personal independance is not an objective virtue but since your article assumes your worldview is ubiquitous it comes off, as I said, as insulting.
 
If you were to write a useful article which outlined the personality types or backgrounds of the people you know who are insulted by, or not motivated by, their work at Google, you could add a significant piece of understanding to the discussion of workplace cultures, one which I would be very happy to read and distribute.
 
If you write that article, let me know.
 
Sincerely,
 
Ian Danforth
 
posted by Ian Danforth
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
google is not for entrepreneurs. entrepreneurs dont work in a company with 10k employees under several layers of management. better than the average tech job, sure, but the gravy train is long gone. I dont think Id take an of offer from google at this point, unless it was very a role I very specifically designed. generic software engineer isnt for me, and I could care less about bouncy balls if Im not making good money.
 
posted by qwerty
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Who gives a crap about Google.  The point to be gleaned from this whole discussion is:
 
fez (http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googlife#c39) - you ROCK, d00d!  Now thats the attitude to have!
 
posted by Xene
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
You always find a way to make everything depressing. Youd think people would learn to quit inviting you places.
 
posted by 
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
change might be necessary thinks Im a sensationalist for using titles and conclusions.
 
googler thinks Im wrong for saying things I never said.
 
Ka-Ping Yee thinks Ive destroyed my credibility by using facts to make my argument.
 
Several others use bogus ad hominem attacks. (Hint: Every time I go to Google theyve either offered to give me a job or buy my company or both. And Im free to quit Conde Nast any time I like.)
 
I agree with Sam; it seems Ive hit a nerve.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Excellent, at times deliberately provocative and seems to have succeeded at that ;-). I recently heard of two respected open source contributors quitting Google - one after spending less than two years, and one after spending just three months. The latter is also an OReilly author. Have also heard of the divide between the pre-IPO and post-IPO haves/have-nots.
 
posted by Rams
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Google offered to buy your company?  And you turned them down why?  Im assuming they just lowballed you?
 
Please elaborate.  Sounds like a great blog post.
 
posted by Ethan
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Something very important I learned during my six months working at Chuck E. Cheeses: somebody always goes pee in the ball pen.
 
posted by Jojo
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
googler thinks Im wrong for saying things I never said.
 
Uh, I quoted verbatim the things you said that I thought were wrong.  So you did say them.  Did you even read my comment?
 
posted by googler
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Google doesnt treat its employees like children, it decouples them from events not related to coding.
 
Many Fortune 500 employers do treat their employees like childern, counting keystrokes, filtering web searches, videotaping their every move. Maybe its more that those employers act like abusive parents
 
posted by NotAtGoogle
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
i love google. it allows me to search the internet. but i heard that the people who work there are kind of tards. (aspergers, bouncy ball, millemian falcun tatoo, etc) i would not invite them to my holiday party.
 
posted by incoherent
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
I just feel very sorry for the Google employees who made Google Video and then saw Google pay 1.6 Billion dollars for YouTube. Just because of this, I will rather try making a YouTube and die than serve stock option selling managers at Google to increase their stock worth. And, did you know how many stock option you get when you join Google now? I can bet that it is a number closer to zero and very far from 1.6 Billion United States Dollars.
 
Amen.
 
posted by Anon
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
To Dan: Asking to remove anti-semitic post
 
Just because some one said that Google is owned by two Jewish Gentlemen in a context where he implied that no one clicks their Ads, it does not mean the persons post is anti-semitic. Your post is like calling a child who points at different looking people a racist.
 
posted by Anon
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
For those who think that Google offices are very plush and comfy take a look at the piece of ordinary codswallop long tabled dumb halls that is the Googleplex Sydney. The London office is also very similar too.
 
posted by Anononymous
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Well in a world where thirty year olds play video games, twenty seven year olds live with their parents, people put off marriage until into their thirties, and baby boomers are talking about how 60 is the new 30 I dont think this infantilizing is limited to just google.
 
posted by Webomatica
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
You know that is not what i think; we disagree on whether your broad claims are substantiated.  Which is the more productive response to criticism: deliberately mischaracterizing it to put it in worse light, or trying to understand what motivated it?
 
Youve abandoned the high ground at this point.  Im sure youre better than this, Aaron.  Maybe youre just having an off day or something.  I dont think this is worth arguing about further.
 
posted by Ka-Ping Yee
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
About the X Prize replica of SpaceShipOne, I was a volunter at the X1 launch a few years ago and saw the real one, and was at the Google campus recently and saw the fake one  they looked exactly the same to me.
 
Best,
  Brad
 
posted by Brad Neuberg
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Googles work environment sucks? Have you ever worked in a mall? Full-time to put food on the table? There may be a reality distortion in this write up, but it isnt Googles.
 
posted by ~bc
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
I respect the confidence of the author of this site.  He seems to mimic Paul Grahams way of writing. However, I have not seen any work of the author significant enough for him to talk in such a over-confident voice. Talking with few friends and speculate from your limited experiences does not seem to be a good way to understand how things work.
 
Maybe, you can just adopt a more open attitude of admitting that you dont understand a lot of things like the Richard Feynman.
 
posted by traanf
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Just because you happen to overhear Googlers complain about perks or GFS doesnt mean were unhappy. In fact, despite the complaining, most people are grateful to be working here. Even at Google, everyday isnt filled with puppy dogs and ice cream just most of them.
 
posted by another googler
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
I find this article very interesting.
 
With the way you are telling things, Aaron, you seem to base it on facts. But quite frankly, I find it hard to believe that employees want to leave Google. If I were given a chance to pick a company, my best bet would be in Google.
 
They make you enjoy what youre doing. And thats the best part! Earning while playing. And dont forget the stock options.
 
posted by Wilford
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
I agree with Wilford. I would never want to leave a job like Google of i worked there.
 
posted by Edwin
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Your a dumbass
 
posted by Dark Vader
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Funny thing this article, I just forwarded it to my entire team and hopefully they will get a good laugh out of it just like I did. Apparently our secrecy does keep the general public clueless about Googles interworkings. You have no idea how great it is to be integrated like you become at Google. To sit down at a table and eat lunch with people who are not only brilliant, but share your interests.
Its really too bad we cant say much more because of NDAs but oh well. Im happy with my job and you can just keep your speculations.
 
posted by Jordan
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
You are a sorry whining moran.
 
posted by Trevor
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Any company that wants to keep its employees happy provides a supportive, creative environment. Whether the company provides free food and bouncy balls in addition to that or as a replacement for that is my main issue.
 
I agree with previous posters that it is only demeaning if you take it that way.
 
I strongly suggest you read Microserfs, though. You hit one of the main story lines on the head, and extending the college experience may be why many tech companies succeed.
 
The idea of free soft drinks and offices with doors is at least as old as Microsoft, if not older.
 
cheers,
 
posted by Jon Steiner
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
As someone who works for Google, I find your theory interesting, but more importantly, wrong.
 
posted by Don Chawannano
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
As a New York Googler whos been there for three years, I would have to say you are dead wrong. Everyone I know who works there either acts childish (the army of programmers), enthusiastically adolescent (their managers and overseers), or else is deeply cynical (the hot-shot programmers).  Wrong, wrong, wrong
 
I have never been in such a grown-up workplace in my life  and Ive been a software engineer for 25 years.  The fact that you see senior managers perched on beach balls is a Good Thing  it doesnt indicate rampant hebephrenia!
 
Oh, and there are tons of Suits around here  mainly but absolutely not entirely in sales  and they love the place too.
 
Sure, I get frustrated out of my mind at times.  The challenges are staggering.  A lot of times I feel like an idiot.  But that comes with the territory of attempting to be utterly fantastic and sometimes even succeeding.
 
posted by Tom Ritchford
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
If people want to be treated like children, then let it be so.  If there was ever an example of a company engaged in an Icarus-like temptation of fate, it would be Google.  Just like all the other rec-room dot.bombs, Google will have its rude awakening and the kindergooglers will cry and whine about having their jobs taken overseas by Indian and Chinese entrepreneurs who work in dilapidated offices without the luxury of spending shareholder dollars on free lunches and big boy toys.  When that happens, what will all this talk of stimulating creativity and treating the labor force kindly amount to?
 
Theres no substitute for hard work.  You can have every degree known to man, be able to pass the cleverest entrance exam, be number one man on campus, and youll always get beat by the guy who needs it more than you.  Google is bloated, arrogant, overvalued, lacking serious revenue potential, diffused at the tactical and strategic levels, and has put far too much emphasis on book smarts in lieu of fierce, hot-blooded competition.
 
I use gmail and google search, but I could permanently migrate off either in less than an hour on a whim as soon as something better comes along.  And Ive never even thought for a moment about clicking any online banner, let alone adsense.
 
posted by Sunchild
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
All I know is they didnt hire me, so they must be on the downhill slope to mediocrity. :)
 
posted by Anony-mouse
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
Your piece on Google is thoughtlessly reductionist.  Being cooked for and having free laundry does not make you infantile.  Neither does living in an office full of bright colors and bouncy balls.  I know several office on the west coast with paid lunches and nerf weapons that produce everything from financial services to solar panels - and theyre profitable.
 
My first job out of college was as a programmer at a large power plant in the midwest.  I had two managers with conflicting agendas, systems that were nightmarishly put together, and a job of rewriting all the code we paid millions to outsource.  My second job was working as a contractor, where I ran from 6 month job to 6 month job, never settling down, always worried about my next paycheck, never having benefits.
 
Now I work at Google.  I could care less about the benefits of free laundry.  Im happy to have a dental plan.  I dont feel as though Im infantilized, at all.  I work long hours and attend presentations when they bring in prominent scientists and researchers. Over break, I visited the University of Washingtons graduate computer science department and the camaraderie and atmosphere between computer science grad students felt very much like Google.
 
Lastly, Google does not lure programmers straight out of college.  Most of the people in my new-hire class had at least 3 to 4 years experience.  My most-asked question was where did you work last? and answers were usually another tech company such as yahoo, hp, or oracle.
 
Honestly, Id like your opinion on how a company should treat its employees.  Since providing comfortable benefits is infantilizing, how should employees be treated to make sure theyre grown up?  What is your definition of grown up anyway?
 
posted by pynchonian
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
As Google has grown, sarcasm and hypocrisy creeps in
 
posted by Known
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Man had always assumed that he was more intelligent than dolphins because he had achieved so much - the wheel, New York, wars and so on - whilst all the dolphins had ever done was muck about in the water having a good time. But conversely, the dolphins had always believed that they were far more intelligent than man - for precisely the same reasons.
 
Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy
 
posted by Andrew Pennebaker
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
You are the most intellectually dishonest smart person I know of.  I almost wonder if you are conducting an experiment to see how long people will keep trying to have reasoned debates with you before giving up.
 
posted by Mark
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Ive been working jobs since I was 14, rock quarry yard person consolidating slate, bus boy, vendor, waitor, bartender, software engineer, dishwasher, office helper, copyeditor, and a few other things. And you know what, Im just out of college, too. I can tell, with a fair amount of confidence that if google wanted to take care of my laundry, feed me lunch, and give me big bright bouncy balls, amazing colleagues, and a cached version of the Internet I wouldnt be sitting there thinking about how I was infantalized and saying But as much as they [I] want to leave Google, the infantilizing tactics have worked: [Im] afraid [I couldnt] survive anywhere else. No, I know I can, and so dont a lot of other googlers.
 
But, if I were some random blogger sitting in my living room, I might find some sly way to gripe that google wont hire me, so Im going to call them all a bunch of babies :-P
 
Just kidding. I can feel your discontent and as a cursory and somewhat trite view at google I can see it from your perspective  as Im sure there are a lot of perspectives it can be seen from.
 
posted by Joshua Gay
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Well, if anything, from the comments it seems googlers are a bit insecure/defensive.
 
posted by Me
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Aaron writes from the perspective of someone picking between a job at a hot startup company and a job at Google. In that context, theres some truth to the article. But thats not the context for the vast majority of readers, and especially not for people in general. Most peoples career prospects are blatantly inferior to those of Google employees (with or without infantilizing). Thus, if Google employees are made infants by their employer, it follows that the vast majority of readers must be made into something much worse than infants by their employers. Since most people prefer to see themselves as professionals to seeing themselves as inferior to infants, they have good reason to be insulted by this article.
 
posted by Conrad
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
One fact here is more telling than any other.  Many Google employees have chimed in with their support for the company.  However, none of these disgruntled Googlers Aaron talks about have shown up to throw in their support for his point.  Although Aaron claims to hear mostly negative things about the work environment, everyone here who actually has any authority on the issue (working for Google) is pleased with their lot.
 
posted by James Aguilar
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Google will have its rude awakening and the kindergooglers will cry and whine about having their jobs taken overseas by Indian and Chinese entrepreneurs who work in dilapidated offices without the luxury of spending shareholder dollars on free lunches and big boy toys.
 
Interestingly, almost every software engineer at Google (Mountain View, at least) was born in the USA. From that, I conclude the USA is still extremely competitive in software engineering. USA! USA! USA!
 
posted by USA!
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Employment is for those who want to survive in life.
Entrepreneurship is for those who want to succeed in life.
 
posted by Known
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
I used to work at Google as a Contractor. Let me tell you, it wasnt the greatest place for a contractor. First, you have red badges, so anyone with a Google badge looks down on you. Already you feel left out, and you dont feel like enjoying all the benefits Googlers have. In addition to that, Contractors do a lot of the bitch work, but yet some Googlers do too. Like this one lady, who had an MBA from Stanford, was doing Email support! Im sure she was happy about that.
 
Another interesting thing I noticed is that the Engineers run everything! There is a constant battle between product managers and engineers. Its like they kinda hate each other. The engineers make it, and the product managers have to figure out what to do with it. Its like a treadmill of producing products.
 
Lastly, people have to wear many hats there. What I mean by that is everyone can contribute on other projects. What this does is, spread everyone too thin. You have maybe a manager for Gmail working as the manager for Desktop, and the engineer for Checkout working on the backend of Base. This is cool an all, cause everyone super smart, but come on now be realistic, you can only really devote 100% of your time to one thing and make it work. All in all, I miss the food. I dont miss working there. The people arnt really all that friendly, people have arrogance and MBA, PHD attitudes.
 
Oh yeah, and they only have like 3 or 4 people working on product marketing. Honestly, they didnt even know what the hell they were doing. Too much smarts equals no common sense. That was the only thing Google needs, common sense and hot girls. Data isnt everything.
 
posted by Ron Diggity
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Working for Google is equally as fun as working for the religion of Scientology.
 
:smirk:
 
posted by Jon
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Whats the problem with Mountain View? If you think it is a desert you havent been lived in many suburbs. Compared to others it has a lot to offer. Taking swipes at the suburbs is so seventies, dude.
 
Youre being rather narrow-minded by calling Googles behavior infantilizing. Providing for college hire needs is actually a growing high tech trend right now around the globe. In China and India, it addresses a need and a reality. Whos to say it doesnt do the same here? Its not a Google innovation.
 
posted by kongjie
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
I used to work at Google as a Contractor. Let me tell you, it wasnt the greatest place for a contractor. First, you have red badges, so anyone with a Google badge looks down on you. Already you feel left out, and you dont feel like enjoying all the benefits Googlers have.
 
Most contractors get paid hourly though, which usually ends up being a lot more money (as long as you can keep your job). I dont know about Google, but Microsoft contract programmers can charge $90+ per hour.
 
posted by Hodger
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
I know one person who turned down an offer to work at Google and another who works for Google. Both are happy.
 
What does this prove?  It proves that there is Ying and there is Yang.
 
posted by Anon Omus
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Hey Aaron,
 
Your blog was recommended by a mutual friend, and Ive largely enjoyed it over the past month or so. Every now and then, however, you have a temptation to play de Tocqueville. You try to build a model or a theory for a place or a thing based on your observations, treating us to your views as to what makes them tick. Youre smart, and youre also a compelling writer, which means that most of the time you dream up a model that either speaks to some essential truth, or at least is deftly written enough to be persuasive.
 
Other times you get things wrong  sometimes because you miss the real big picture owing to lack of life experience, or other times because its seductive to find a model for things even when there isnt one. Ive seen this in your posts about Stanford, and intensely in your posts about San Francisco and the rest of Silicon Valley.
 
This desire to find a model/theory/summary/essence of a thing can be very compelling, and I appreciate the fact that you look for them in these expositions about the places, things, and ideas in your life. Its just that when you do get it wrong, its really wrong, and it stands out like a sore thumb.
 
Google is a place that its easy to be passionate about. Without seeming immodest, the work we do there has helped to change the world, and (I hope) will continue to do so in the future. Its a place where I can show up and end up working with some profoundly smart people  selected not just for the smart trait, but also the get things done trait: good company if youre the sort of person interested in changing things. Its also, and maybe most importantly, a place where the people running the show have a profound commitment to Doing the Right Thing.
 
Thats why you see Googlers reacting so strongly to claims that the stuff you see around campus is part of some effort to infantilize its workers into being afraid to leave. Its not because you hit a nerve  its because its so obviously not what they were intended to do. The best part about most of our benefits is that they are designed to relieve the burden of lifes bullshit  shuttles to get you through the ridiculous California traffic, free, amazing food within a stones throw so that you dont have to waste time, and more beside.
 
You might argue that the result of sparing people from bullshit might be some infantilization, but youre dead wrong when you think its the goal. It bespeaks to a profound lack of understanding of what the people and the place are about  like you grasped at the form, and missed the substance.
 
The other fun things you see  the ball pits, the dinosaur, the occasional video games, the marker board art, are exactly that: for fun! (Many of them are personal contributions from Googles employees and its Founders to Google).
 
There are a lot of fairly sophisticated arguments you can make about why people are more creative and more productive when they have fun, or when they have an outlet for stress, but I feel like this is a more succinct summary:
 
Would you rather work at a place that:
 
(a) Has a dinosaur
(b) Does not have a dinosaur
 
I know what my answer would be, but perhaps I have been infantilized by the nefarious practices of my employer. ;)
 
I encourage you to keep looking at Google, because  if you really want to write about what makes it tick, I feel like youve missed the point.
 
posted by Brandon
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Aaron - I think you are just JELAOUS Sorry, buddy - maybe youll get a job elsewhere :/
 
posted by oh crap
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Id be glad to try to correlate the following data:
BMI, happiness at Google (or excitement about Google) and marital life (married with fellow googler, etc.).
I guess some of us who got used to having a real life would not fit in this collegial mold.
I was once interviewed by Google but they had nothing to offer me. I currently have a 7-minute commute-time between home and work. I also didnt appreciate being suddenly assaulted by Googles recruiters on LinkedIn, especially when none of these admitted doing it intentionally because I was on their list.
 
posted by bob
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
I worked at Google for about a year.  The company provides food, freedom (20% time), fun (games, etc), and many other onsite amenities.
 
The employees tend to be on the young/immature/geeky end of the spectrum.  Most employees work on a small slice of big projects.  So it is not a place for people who wand to get their hands dirty in a lot of places.  Think about the challenge of optimizing a network of grid computers bigger than anyone can imagine.  Theyve got a team of people focused on file systems, a team focused on energy consumption of chips, etc.    But the people involved in those teams are free to be entreprenuerial and pursue a project like GDrive/Platypus or spending time waxing poetic about windmill power.  Its a neat place to work, but also a place where most of the employees are worker ants.
 
posted by 
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
@#1 Or, maybe Im just to infantalized to see the truth.
 
Either youre a liar or youre confirming the authors assertions. I wouldnt hire a person who does not know the difference between to and too.
And I doubt Google would do so either.
 
posted by Fat Tony
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
In another 10 or 20 years, everything will be different.
 
posted by Wesley Tanaka
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
The grass is always greener
Spend enough time in any work environment will get old no matter what the situation is.  And it seems that people will complain about something in the work place.  People burn out fast, we work too much - that is the real problem.
 
posted by Kevin
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
http://www.angryflower.com/pooper.gif
 
posted by Dave
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
I am not one to troll blogs and say things like Great post but this was in fact a GREAT POST Aaron!
 
posted by Aaron Pratt
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
this article really sucked. and youre an asshole.
 
posted by reader 386
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Reading this makes me envious of any large company that shows a sense of caring for an employee. I happen to work at a fortune 500 company that doesnt even bother to fake it for the employee anymore.
 
Overworked, underpaid skeleton crews barely keeping a $6 billion dollar a year revenue generating company going. The company makes a profit in spite of its top management. No more bonus, no no more stock options, no benefits except high priced health care options. All in the name of the holy stock price. Yeah, Id kill for a little fun at work no and then
 
posted by Francis
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
I joined Google 19 months ago to work on GMail. It was a very long interview process, and I was thrilled to get an offer. I came from a mid-size technology company before Google. An ex-colleague from there got me to apply to Google. It has been mostly nice. The good
 
1.) It is pretty easy to concentrate on my work and be productive.
2.) The side projects are fun.
3.) Smart people to brainstorm with.
4.) A meritocratic atmosphere where confrontation is understood. Most people are used to having to prove their ideas.
 
Ok, the bad
1.) Collectivism. If I had a dollar for every time Ive had the Lone Ranger analogy used in a negative sense I wouldnt need my options to vest.
2.) Culture. Im in my 30s with kids. I would not recommend that combination with Google.
3.) No WAH. Ok, so its not that you cant telecommute, but it is definitely discouraged big time. This was shocking to me since I had asked about this during the interview process and told its no big deal. 
4.) The socioeconomic divide. Porsche driving developers always make sure that their non-Porsche driving co-workers are aware of their car keys  if you know what I mean.
 
Im definitely not looking for another job right now, but Google is probably a little closer to Aarons description than many Googlers would like to admit. Im definitely thinking Im going to get rich off my options, but the equation (vested options == pay off giant mortgage) definitely enters my head from time to time.
 
posted by Ren
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
Thanks for your insightful artilce on what it is like to exist in Googles world.  I currenlty work at a startup where the owners dont get it but have taken my work and the work of other and will soon be unloading it for millions.  Good for them, but what about all of the people that helped them get there?  Well you got your small pay check, wasnt that enough?  From what you wrote, it seems that at least at some level Google is doing some things to take care of their people.  Sorry so many choose to beat you up for your opinions.  I find them at least insightful and allow for at least a measuring stick with which to compare.
 
Maybe read the book Peopleware, by Tom DeMarco and Timothy Lister
 
posted by Insightful
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
I work at Google, and frankly, I suspect you need to broaden your circle of friends here.  Your description seems quite far from the day-to-day operation I see.
 
Out of ten thousand employees, there will be some who are unhappy, and some who are just putting in their time.  The question must become whether the free food, snacks, toys, and other cruft contribute to or ameliorate the unhappiness for most of the employees.  (And, I suppose, whether you want happy employees.  Google does.  I do.)  I suspect that the perks do much more good than they do harm, and not because they are making employees incapable of operating in the real world.
 
I am not claiming that Google has done everything right.  For example, I worked from home for seven years.  I miss the thirty second commute.  On the other hand, I am now around a very large population of very smart people.  It is pretty rare for a company of this size to allow full time telecommuting, so I accepted that tradeoff when I joined the company, even though I think they would get quite a bit of benefit from encouraging telecommuting more.
 
That said, they seem to do more right, and less wrong, as far as encouraging quality work, than any other company I have talked to lately, of even moderately similar size and scope.
 
As far as hitting a nerve, I would instead suggest that you were purposefully rude, and got a surprising number of reasonable responses.
 
A hint: telling someone that everyone you know at their company either acts childish, enthusiastically adolescent, or else is deeply cynical, and that the infantilizing tactics have worked: theyre afraid they wouldnt be able to survive anywhere else. cannot be taken as anything but an attack on the other people there.
 
Scott
 
posted by Scott Ellsworth
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
Ren, Im not sure what you mean by the Lone Ranger comment (you mean decisions made by consensus).
 
But Ive found that WAH not a big deal.  Then again, half my team was in NYC  whats 5 more miles?
 
The main thing I disagree on is the Porsche factor.  I saw a much higher proportion of Porsches at my last job, which was not a big dot-com.  I dont think people actually flash their money here.  Then again, at my last job, I was reasonably sure no one had a Lambourghini or two tucked away at home :-\
 
posted by Yet Another Googler
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
InterestingI have a friend who works there and joined about a year ago in the marketing dept. The first thing she mentioned was that marketing is lower on the totem pole than the valet parkers, little to no respect (hence the fruitless search for a CMO). She also senses a bit of analysis paralysis - every marketing meeting she is in goes on and on, filled with pontification and action items with little to no real concrete next steps. The place is obviously run by the admittedly intelligent engineers and devs, and this is starting to show through a certain lack of product focusdomain registration? Cmon. Anyway - Ive heard similar thingsas much as Google is the media darling (The failure of Answers was actually lauded by many in the press as a success, go figure), cracks are appearing in the day to day strategic direction of the company.
 
posted by Brian
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
No one but the founders of Google have the authority to make binding job offers without the approval of HR. It doesnt matter what youve done in the past, if people (besides HR) are making you offers when you show up, theyre hollow offers.
 
You have to make it through the interviews, and dropping out of Stanford to go work on a startup that failed only to jump ship to Reddit doesnt cut the mustard.
 
posted by Aaron A.
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
Why was this comment deleted last time? I was just posting a third relevant XKCD comic (http://xkcd.com/c192.html) and saying that I appreciated Brandons comment above. Sheesh.
 
posted by Rhombus
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
Interesting points.
 
This reminds me of Pixar. I have several friends that work there and have visited the office in Emeryville as well. They have a very similar atmosphere but moreso. Foosball, arcade games, comic and art everywhere.
 
In Pixars case, Id say that they want to create an atmosphere of creativity and ingenuity. From my visits to Google, Id venture to say that Google is attempting to accomplish the same thing.
 
Your observation about the dinosaur and SpaceShipOne are interesting. Even the use of the word infantilization is interesting too. I cant help but think that when we were kids we dreamed big. Those dreams werent mature or polished, but the sky was the limit. Perhaps thats not such a bad thing to have.
 
posted by peter c
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
dumb fuck
 
posted by asdf
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
Id say the large number of juvenile responses by Googlers pretty much proves Aarons point.  Relax, googs, Aarons not going to take your toys away.
 
posted by ss
 on December 17, 2006 #
 
I have worked there almost seven years- could quit tomorrow and love going to work everyday.
 
posted by mjheal
 on December 17, 2006 #
 
Aaron, this apparent attitude of googlers sounds like youve been eavesdropping on conversations at zeitgest.  You shouldnt do that, its rude.  Some people will bitch and moan about their jobs no matter what they do.  Is that representative?  Probably not.  Can GFS/et al be a cow?  Certainly.  Who cares?
 
posted by  
 on December 17, 2006 #
 
I think a more substantive post could be written about Googles bullshit interview questions, which Aaron mentioned en passant. I have my own limited experience with those.
 
posted by Joe Clark
 on December 17, 2006 #
 
Gang,
 
Greetings.  An associate pointed me at this thread, thinking I might want to comment given my array of public statements relating to various Google policies.
 
I havent visited the Googleplex, but I have been out to the new Santa Monica center a couple of times, am in contact with various Google personages, and have a good sense of what HQ is like.
 
While I have certainly been critical about particular aspects of Google operations (especially in the privacy arena) I find the arguments about the Google environment promoting infantilization to be laughable.
 
In my view, the Google facilities and environment are clearly aimed at fostering creativity and retention  and of course maximal work output.  I see nothing wrong with any of this when implemented through this kind of carrot approach. Frankly, its the kind of environment where even an old guy like me wouldnt mind hanging out if I felt that I was accomplishing useful work.
 
I might add that all of the Google folks Ive met or otherwise been in contact with have seemed intelligent, friendly, and concerned about important issues  with nary the kind of dead wood so common in many organizations in evidence.
 
Theres plenty about Google to admire, and some crucial areas to be extremely concerned about.  But I do find the Google environment to be refreshing in a way that I havent seen even approximated in many, many years (if ever), and I always give credit when credit is due.
 
And besides, Ive always been a big fan of Lava Lamps.
 
Lauren
Lauren Weinstein
lauren@vortex.com or lauren@pfir.org
Tel: +1 (818) 225-2800
http://www.pfir.org/lauren
Co-Founder, PFIR
   - People For Internet Responsibility - http://www.pfir.org
Co-Founder, IOIC
   - International Open Internet Coalition - http://www.ioic.net
Founder, CIFIP
   - California Initiative For Internet Privacy - http://www.cifip.org
Founder, PRIVACY Forum - http://www.vortex.com
Member, ACM Committee on Computers and Public Policy
Laurens Blog: http://lauren.vortex.com
DayThink: http://daythink.vortex.com
 
posted by Lauren Weinstein
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
Ive never worked at Google.  In fact, I interviewed twice and only
got as far as the second round of phone interviews.  I was shocked, to
put it mildly, that there were questions such as What is the tcpdump
command used to print out DNS packets?  This is the sort of thing Id
think they wouldnt ask, since it can be looked up easily, so no one
would memorize it.  OTOH, there are lots of thought-provoking computer
science questions that can be asked.
 
Anyway, Ive heard and read much about how smart most Googlers are,
and have even mused on that subject a bit myself.  All other things
aside, I dont understand how they couldnt have realized click fraud
would be a problem when AdWords and AdSense were on the drawing
board.  Or if they did realize it, how those services were launched
without tools available to help advertisers and publishers protect
themselves from fraud, or at least some warnings about the possibility
of fraud.
 
posted by CPCcurmudgeon
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
Put the drugs down and step away from the blog dude.
 
posted by Mike
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
I find it laughable that for Google sympathizers to strongly rebut Aarons assertions is itself taken as evidence (by commenters like Sam, ss, Fat Tony, aand Me) of the validity of those assertions. This, in a post about people being encouraged to behave like infants.
 
And Fat Tony: you should know better than to make snap judgements about someones abilities based on the most minor typoe in a blog comment. If I had a dime for every opportunity Ive had to jump on minor grammatical errors to score such cheap points, I might be better off than even a vested Google employee.
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
Rhombus: Becuase thats the exact xkcd comment I link to.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
Aaron A.: Some of the people offering were the founders.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 18, 2006 #
 
Funny. I worked for Microsoft for close to ten years. Yea, I did the google interview recently. I remember thinking that it looked a lot like Microsoft ten years ago. Sounds like they are headed down the same path. Too bad. But I guess its to be expected when the pattern of growth is very similar.
 
At the end of the day, the programmers and testers are there only to make the investors rich. Much like assembly line workers.
 
posted by Jose
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
I worked for CNET for 3.5 years and thought it was tremendous.  But THISwell, id work there in a second and the toys sound GREAT.  IMO.
 
posted by bg
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
This post reflects more about you and your Googler friends than about Google. Your biases and inexperience are showing.
 
I really encourage your Googler engineer friends to AT LEAST read the GFS paper (http://labs.google.com/papers/gfs.html). I bet they have not. Even better, try reading the source code and truely understand how it works. Or talk to the designers.
 
posted by ex-googler
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
You wrote an interesting article. Google is becoming a iconic enigma, but all empires collapse. So we know what is now, but what is tomorrow? Microsoft also invested millions to make staff happy, and companies like Yahoo! have been very agressive in taking market share. So Google may attract a lot of press over its paranoia but its methods are widely used, in differing forms, but many US companies.
 
posted by Rare Fox
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
You wrote an interesting article. Google is becoming a iconic enigma, but all empires collapse. So we know what is now, but what is tomorrow? Microsoft also invested millions to make staff happy, and companies like Yahoo! have been very agressive in taking market share. So Google may attract a lot of press over its paranoia but its methods are widely used, in differing forms, but many US companies.
 
posted by Rare Fox
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
I agree.  I interviewed at Google and the overwhelming feeling was of a creche with computers.  The products are great and they are fantastic productivity gains when used to but tow rok for Google you have to either buy into the Google religion or you dont work there.
 
I was asked the same set of questions seven times in interviews and one guy was so in love with himself and his abilities that he was unable to relate to anyone of lesser ability.
 
I do agree with the company using resources to help employees get the chores done.  Thats just common sense.  But I dont agree with the star trek view on employees.  It takes all kinds to make the world go round and that includes some dumb people too.  There are many types of intelligence not just coding ability.
 
posted by billy
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
Just for reference, most high-security prisons keep very good food on hand. It helps keep the prisoners in-line by keeping their base instincts in check.
 
Google, friend or foe, you decide.
 
And yes, as was mentioned earlier, dorms would be ideal. You can keep people there longer and revoke their housing when they quit.  Talk about rentention programs!
 
Also they have done many studies that show the more hazing one goes through, the stronger the bond of the people that join that club.  Google is a club. To get it in was harder earlier (and still hard today), but thats the point. Make it a cult. You work at Google, pratically live there, wear Google clothes, have google friends, and have googly kids.
 
But when the tree rocks, down will come baby, and all. (or something like that)
 
posted by Googly-eye
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
I came very late  so Im at the bottom of it but.. I would love to transalte that one too.
 
I think infantilizing is @ work in the industry. I would make a // with the friendship world of social networks. Youre my friend, youre my friend  you too.
 
All Internet has to grow up a bit and some comments are real proof of it.
 
posted by leafar
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
[quote]
yawn
 
I work at Google, am fully vested, and could retire tomorrow if I wanted to. I continue to work here because it actually is the most interesting place in the world to work at.
[/quote]
 
kinda proves the point doesnt it?
 
posted by joe
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
I joined when Google was 500 employees, now were up to around 10,000 or so, and Ive been around the block big companies and small for the past 12 years in Silicon Valley. Google employees were slightly happier pre-IPO, but not by much. Hands down it remains the best place to work  worldwide  because weve been able to hire the brightest and mostly non-selfcentered people out there. Plus the founders/CEO have all the right values, so no matter what your function is at the company, youre contributing to a good cause. I too could retire tomorrow but chose not to. Life is good at the Googleplex.
 
posted by Early Googler
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
none of these disgruntled Googlers Aaron talks about have shown up to throw in their support for his point
 
Of course they havent. Have you seen what they did to China?
 
posted by 
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
non-selfcentered.riiiightive never met an egotistical/egomaniacal googler beforeno way!
 
posted by 
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
Great article Aaron! I dont know what were yelling about
 
posted by Eddie
 on December 22, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
Im an ex-googler and this article is absolutely spot-on. Youve nailed it. The place is basically run along cult lines and the smartest people in the room thing is bullshit too, theyre no smarter than any other random selection of people.
 
thats all,
 
e
 
posted by eduardo
 on December 23, 2006 #
 
This is a very interesting story about Google. I kinda wish my company had some of the aspects of their business, the main one would be the stock options and free food.
 
Slainte / Cheers
 
posted by Keith Cash
 on December 23, 2006 #
 
Fascinating thread we might only add that the same strategy is essentially a military one at its roots: free combat troops from any rear echelon tasks which distract from the core mission. It is cheaper to buy laundry services and food servers from KBR et al than to waste esprit de corps and the fighting mans fire in the belly on mundane tasks. (Now if only the same could be said for powerpoint)
 
Having spent multiple years in hazardous overseas deployments, we often find ourselves peversely missing the no distraction lifestyle, even if food choices were poor (to say the least, compared to the typical American middle class variety) and the  overhead costs of that lifestyle far more difficult.
 
But no one would ever accuse our Uncle of infantalizing anyone in the field.
 
posted by Kent's Imperative
 on December 23, 2006 #
 
My friend, you suck. Please be wiser in 2007! Stop bullshitting
 
posted by Borg
 on December 23, 2006 #
 
Im a google employee speaking for myself only.
 
They dont do our laundry. They simply provide machines for free. Not bleeding our reds is our responsbility alone.
 
The only ones I know who use the ballpit are interns.
 
Im not so naive as to believe were GOING to change the world, but of any company Ive worked at (about 5 in high tech), its the only one who believes its their responsibility to devote some resources to making it a better place  not only for the techies, but for the worlds poor, my mom, or whatever. Thats why Google is one of maybe 2 companies Ive ever seen in industry that Id be super excited to work out.
 
Between you and me, I dont get the dinosaur either, but its not any weirder than the weird 50 foot tall metal kid cut out gracing the former SGI building across the street. Or the bizarre twisted metal stuff around my college campus.
 
Your blog post makes a jab that has been made many times before.
 
posted by gleemie
 on December 23, 2006 #
 
Okay, my two bits.  I dont work at Google, I work near Google, I commute through the Googleplex to get to work.  All I can say is when I go by in the morning, at lunch, or after work, I dont see many people who look happy.  I also very rarely see anyone who has the common sense to LOOK BOTH WAYS BEFORE CROSSING THE STREET!!!  Dammit!!  I swear theyve lost any sense of self-preservation.  Ive narrowly avoided many accidents because some self-absorbed drone figures that a crosswalk across a four lane 35 mile per hour zone is really going to make a difference when some other self-absorbed drone comes cruising along at 45mph in their Prius.  Is it just arrogance, or do they extinguish the will to live?
 
posted by 
 on December 25, 2006 #
 
Its amusing to see so many Google employees tell you that youre wrong, as though the rest of us dont realize that those who like the shiny balls and spaceships and dinosaurs will, of course, be offended when you call them childish.  Further, Im tickled at all the claims that Googles employees are brilliant and super smart, yet they seem to be unable to write well.  Im not talking about a simple typo or misspelling, but rather grammatical errors that make a few of these posts unintelligible.  Also I suspect those lengthy tests to prove your worth to Google before they offer you a job is more of a gimmick than anything.  It makes all the employees feel special by giving them a false sense of accomplishment, employees can believe their co-workers are of a certain calibre (they must be smart, they passed the test), and Google can play it up to the world.  We have the best and the brightest, these PSAT scores are proof!  Riiiight.  Too bad the best and the brightest cant manage to put together a more compelling argument than, Youre a dumbass, and I can prove it, but this NDA wont let me.
 
The idea that a corporation will try and convince its employees that they cant do better elsewhere isnt unique to Google, however.  I worked in a insurance company in Kansas  about as far away from Google as you can get  and when work conditions there got to be horrific the powers that be pulled the you wont find a better job anywhere else routine.  Everyone does it.  Some people choose to believe it, and some dont.
 
posted by Stacia
 on December 25, 2006 #
 
Hmmmwhat is the dress code at google?
 
I work for a small software company ( about 5 people total ) and I am able to wear shorts, sandals and even sleep over in either of my two offices.
 
We dont get free food but we pretty much have 90% freedom to do what we want as well as a company car.
 
posted by Jon
 on December 25, 2006 #
 
Provide a better alternative for us. What type of environment is more appropriate than the googleplex?
 
posted by rohit
 on December 25, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
Ive been over to google once for a charity dinner.  I was impressed by the fact that google sponsored the event because the head chef had volunteered at a previous (not at Google) fundraiser.  He wanted to bring the dinner to Google, and management let him do it and without charge to the social services non-profit.  I was impressed by that.
 
As to the infantilization, I have known a few people that worked there, and none of them struck me as infantile.  Just very accomplished, focused guys.
 
Finally, regarding the employee perks I think the commenters who mentioned Microsoft were pretty on point.  When a firm has wide margins, it can afford to treat the employees very well.  As those margins shrink and the industry matures, then things can change.  Other examples would be IBM and Bell Labs.
 
Nothing wrong with that though, its just the business cycle.  Nothing lasts forever, so we have to enjoy the ride while we canI certainly hope the folks at Google are able to enjoy their stay at the top as long as possible.
 
posted by tim
 on December 25, 2006 #
 
Try working in an office without the bright colors, with just shades of gray and beige.  At first, youll think it looks clean and professional, but after about 6 months, it really starts to wear you down.  The infantile point of view is interesting, but I feel youre interpreting it the wrong way.  To me, the colors, and atmosphere exists as it does to keep the employees happy, interested, and creative.  The same goes for the spaceship and dinosaur.  Labeling them like that is particularly self-serving to your point of view, but I feel they have more to do with science and technology, as well as innovation and education than giant playthings, as you seem to project from your article.
 
I dont want to label anyone, but this article almost reads as though it was written by yet another bitter person who was turned down by Google, and now has a grudge for having their egos busted.
 
I think that perhaps there is something childish about the way they do somethings, but you cant argue with the results.  We were all wildly imaginative and creative as children, so perhaps their atmosphere exists the way it does to try and resurrect that.
 
posted by wizdumb
 on December 26, 2006 #
 
I have visited the Googleplex a few times, I know some nice and very smart people there, but  (and I know you were waiting for the but) everytime their recruiters call, and they have been calling an awful lot recently, I say NO, for one simple reason. Google allows for zero telecommuting.
 
Being somewhat older than the average googlekid, I am not interested in living on a high tech campus no matter how shiny the toys. I have a home, a life, a family - and most of the truly progressive high tech companies are fine with me spending time at home, where I work better without distractions anyway.
 
I like lava lamps. I like dinosaur figurines. And if I wanted to join a cult, Google is probably the best cult around. But the cult life ultimately just gives me the heebie jeebies.
 
Having worked at many other big tech companies mentioned in the posts above, I have to agree with the general sentiment that Google is just another big corporation, slightly past its peak. Everything else is hubris and self-delusion.
 
posted by Hamadazai
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
I am all for treating employees well, which in reading your article and many of the comments from actual Google employees seems to indicate.
I cannot comment factually about this but just read what others read about this and acknowledge based on my many years of management experience that many companies do not.
 
Where I can comment on Google here is that they possibly go too over board in treating there employees like Gods. As my experiences with Google staff (from we site management) is not good. They are extremely arrogant and condescending, especially the staff with their Adsense department, what a corrupt bunch they are.
I agree with this earlier comment; 
Im an ex-googler and this article is absolutely spot-on. Youve nailed it. The place is basically run along cult lines and the smartest people in the room thing is bullshit too, theyre no smarter than any other random selection of people.
 
posted by Carl Strohmeyer
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
btw - this has nothing to do with Googles office environment
 
 but Google has enabled millions of people to be able to earn a living (or extra part-time cash) from their AdSense program.
 
I dont care how they get it done (free laundry, free food, bouncy balls, etc for their workers) - but I hope their stock shoots to $1000 and beyond, and the AdSense payouts keep rolling.
 
Word on the street from some Googlers I know is that theyll never split the stock.  Like Berkshire Hathaway.
 
Can you imagine GOOG at $60,000 per share?!?
 
posted by fez
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
>
              To Dan: Asking to remove anti-semitic post
 
Just because some one said that Google is owned by two Jewish Gentlemen in a context where he implied that no one clicks their Ads, it does not mean the persons post is anti-semitic. Your post is like calling a child who points at different looking people a racist.<<<<<<<<
 
OK fine. Can we please have all posts which make irrelevant tangents about ethnicity, religion, or other disruptive/inflammatory subjects removed? Bringing up the ethnicity/religion of people in a forum which is not about either ethnicity or religion may or may not be motivated in a particular way, but its obviously not relevant or polite and has a huge potential for distraction and irrelevance. Somebody please take that down already.
 
posted by Giles Bowkett
 on December 28, 2006 #
 
I read every single comment.  It took me an hour.  And I guess that in a way explains it.  We mostly love Google - as a web search engine - because of the ease with which we can do most of our searches.
 
I dont know why the media by and large chooses not to report on the negative aspects of Google.  Like the terrible long working hours(however enjoyable they might seem or be) or their horrible long-winding no-result-yeilding interviews and there could be a ton others.  Come on, a company cannot be all goody-goody.  And Google is definitely not an exception.
 
I dont know how long the Google honeymoon will last.  Maybe when more of their products are actually delievered(ie. out of beta)pun intended.
 
posted by Random Guy
 on December 28, 2006 #
 
The whole infantilizing theory is just wrong.  There are reasons to work at Google, and reasons to work somewhere else, and reasons not to work at all (if youve been at Google long enough), but no one is afraid to leave Google because they wouldnt be able to survive elsewhere.  Thats just silly.  If anything, I think life at Google makes people overconfident, not underconfident.
 
I know many people who have left Google, many people who have stayed at Google, many people who have joined Google.  The analysis just doesnt ring true for any of them.
 
The environment is the way it is because thats the way the people running things like it.  Its not any deeper than that.  It was the same way when there were 20 people (in fact, some aspects of the environment at that time would seem even more childish, to Aaron).  Surely that doesnt mean they were already hatching a master plan for how to infantilize their 10,000 member workforce, and just putting it into effect six years early!  It just means thats the kind of environment they like.  It appeals to some people, and not others, and thats fine.
 
Google does have amazingly powerful computers and technology.  It also has a shortage of machines and unreliable software.  Theres no contradiction there.  It would be poor business practice if there were so many machines that there were no machine shortages.  (And that would be essentially impossible to achieve-as you give people more machines, they just use more and more resources, just as building more highways leads to more driving but doesnt eliminate road congestion).  It would be poor busines practice to refuse to use any system unless it is perfect and bug-free.  Google wouldnt have gotten to where it is, with attitudes like that.
 
I have no doubt that Larry or Sergey would have offered to hire Aaron.  I think Aaron is a very bright guy.  But I also think, as much as I respect their judgment, they arent perfect, and this particular offer wasnt such a good one.  Aaron would not be a good fit.
 
posted by David desJardins
 on January  1, 2007 #
 
This is one of the more fascinating stories - and threads - Ive encountered.  Time will tell, but the snippets and press clippings in the aggregate point towards a bit more strategy than what first meets the eye.  When you combine paid search with checkout (and the purchase profiling it provides) the development of mobile search (GOOG phone?).  Throw in a recommender network and now a leading position in the evolution to IPTV.and all of a sudden, the forward P/E suddenly starts looking pretty cheap.
 
Personally, Id give my eyeteeth to have the opportunity to work at a place like Google. (or SAS) Any company that focuses on collecting intelligent, energetic people and then makes a major effort to treat them well/increase productivity/retain them should be jealously treasured and guarded.
 
As far as the infantilizing conversation, well I cant speak to thatbut I do have one GOOG story that you may find humorous.
 
I landed a GOOG interview about a year ago thru a visioning paper I wrote on virtual reality for an IPTV marketing slot.  (Im not an engineer, but a technical business guy - the position was for a security product manager, dealing with click fraud.  My guess is they liked the creativity of the paper, but ended up profiling my infosec expertise.)
 
Anyway, I had spent a good 6 hours prepping for the extensive list of questions we were to cover during the interview, but after rescheduling, then calling in 15 minutes late, the 20 something product manager (who while maybe a little naive, is Im sure a very nice guy) drops this landmine right out of the gate: Hi.  Sorry Im late, were having a little emergency here.  I know were scheduled for 30 min, but I only have 10.  Rather than reschedule again, how about giving me a list of all the things you think Google is doing wrong?
 
I kid you not, just like that.
 
For all you conducting interviews, its one thing if you are having this conversation with a fellow employee you know and trust.  Its something else when youre a complete stranger trying to convince someone who is in an obvious rush, with better things to do, youre qualified for a job.
 
Great, what direction should I go?  Was this a test to see if Id done my research?  If Id speak my mind honestly?  How on earth could I answer this truthfully, keep it in a positive light and get us onto something substantive in 10 minutes?
 
From the outside looking in, Id say it appears that what GOOGs doing right certainly outweighs what its doing wrong.
 
Strike One.  He insisted I answer the question.  We have some pretty spirited internal conversations on this subject, and its important we bring on people who can see the strategic hurdles.
 
Internal being the key word, you doofus, this is not the same. 
Do I dodge it again and risk losing him?  @#$!, okay you win.
 
Let me caveat that this is a complicated issue, but agreeing to self-censorship in order to play in the Chinese market may not have been GOOGs most shining momentfrom the outside, it seems do no evil became optional, particularly once the price tag got noticeable.
Hmmm. Okay, what else?
Alright, second Id say theres a brewing backlash that needs managed from the conflict between providing paid advertising over pure search results.
What else?
Third, Star office wasnt a big hit, so why go after Microsoft with this strategy?  Finally, the click fraud issue, and how youre adressing it.
 
Ka-boom,  man down, man down.  Medic!
 
Needless to say, he didnt like any of my responses, and proceeded for the next 9 minutes to argue why I was wrong.
 
Sorry, I need to wrap this up, Ive got another thing
 
I understand, but we really didnt get a chance to, you know, spend much timeWould you like to reschedule?
 
Sure.  Meanwhile, why dont you send me an email with the answers to the interview questions you said you received from the recruiter.
 
Sure, nice talking to you.
 
Click.
 
And that was my Google experience.  After a day of writing my response, I sent off the email.  4 weeks later, the recruiter says thanks, but no thanks.  Not even a reschedule.  Ive sent resumes in since, but no takers.
 
Ah well.  Some things just arent meant to be.  Ive been a true believer from the beginning and made a bunch off the stock, so I cant be too unhappy.  I also have some ideas on stickiness within 2.0 social recommender networks and where mobility is headed, so who knows.  Maybe my future startup may someday be so attractive
 
There are other ways in.
 
Maybe someday.
 
Anyway, Aaron, keep up the interesting articles, and Googlers, keep on keeping on.
 
Best,
 
GW
 
posted by gray williams
 on January  1, 2007 #
 
i agree.
 
ive been in the software business for about 15 years. what a lot of readers dont seem to realize is that Google is nothing new, really, and the infantilizing is nothing new either.
 
the giddiness of dot com came and wenta lot of us enjoyed it, but most watched with bemusement as people came and went, and bright-eyed college kids thought that software making really was like college.
 
it isnt. never has been. the sausage making is tedious. its not magical. theres a very good reason that the business has a turnover rate second only to the restaurant industrya fact Google, Intel (which Ive worked at), Microsoft (worked there too) are all too familiar with.
 
Google, you pointed out, is suffering everything all other grow-fast, try-earnestly-to-be-the-coolest high-tech companies experiencethe post-honeymoon letdown. the psychology of human resources is very intentional, though few employees seem to be willing to acknowledge the fact that theyre being  manipulated to fit corporate goals via HR.
 
posted by Joe Smithson
 on January  2, 2007 #
 
Good Lord, people! Does NOBODY out there realize that LESS THAN HALF of the 10,000+ employees are engineers and programmers???
 
Really, truly - this needs to be known. MOST PEOPLE who work at Google are in SUPPORT roles!! And they are getting paid way less than industry standard for working 50, 60+ hours a week for it! Screw the free food, screw the laundry - the MAJORITY of people working at Google are in buildings without any of these amenities, and are certainly without extra money from stock options.
 
The support staff that make up MOST OF the company are the ones handling all of the phone calls from advertisers and publishers who are making Google money; they are the ones scripting email responses to users (yes, YOU!), who write in with complaints and questions - they are the ones working their asses off, in overtime, but that doesnt matter because they are salaried but way below industry standards for support positions, to make sure that YOU, the user, has an accessible Help Center, has a kind, email response, has an answer to your question.
 
Yes, there are foosball tables in the support buildings, but who has time to play them? Giant overhead projectors alerting them to the current turnaround time for their emails is Big Brother enough to ensure that they dont even THINK about playing foosball when they should be answering support emails. Breakfast, lunch, and dinner are not nice alternatives - they are NECESSARY to ensure that all of the support peons remain dutiful and consistent with their email turnaround times.
 
Wow, sounds like theyre overworked. Cant Google just hire more people? HAHAHAHAHAHA!!!!! For a response to that, please see the above comments. Its as hard to get a support role here if youre an MBA with a PhD as a hobby, as if you invented nuclear physics.
 
Ive been here almost 5 years, and as soon as my refresher grant has vested, I am out like Lance Bass. Its a load of corporate baloney - the 400-person company that I started at has become a nightmare that has eaten my soul. God help the users.
 
posted by 
 on January  4, 2007 #
 
 but Google has enabled millions of people to be able to earn a living (or extra part-time cash) from their Adsense program.
 
I dont care how they get it done (free laundry, free food, bouncy balls, etc for their workers) - but I hope their stock shoots to $1000 and beyond, and the Adsense payouts keep rolling.
 
So it is OK to disable accounts and keep the money of legitimate sites that have had malicious ad clicks just to cause these problems? Google could easily disable the ISP on these clicks.
 
So it is OK when Googles content Adwords display has almost 0 conversions as compared to the same ads on Adwords search? I hope not.
 
It is OK when an ad for Shell Wind Chimes appears on a personal blog with very little relevancy other than the word wind and shell thus forcing the reader to look elsewhere and click on these ads vs. a quality content site where the visitor is much less likely to click an ad? I do not think so; this is corporate corruption at its highest level.
 
If Google really wanted to do something about Adsense fraud they would. Google has the technology to disable ip addresses of suspicious clicks and should even disable the ip address of the business displaying Adsense and probably a certain geographic area around this business to prevent friends from trying to help but they do not.
 
posted by Carl Strohmeyer
 on January 10, 2007 #
 
Haha. Youre kind of an idiot, Aaron. No, really. Or youre just a jealous prick  dont worry; Im sure  you can get a job at Google if you try hard enough.
 
Anywho, whats wrong with making your employees happy? I dont see anything wrong with bouncy balls and bright colors. If thats what makes most of the workers at Google happy, the so be it; its not like Google isnt coming out with awesome things everyday.
 
Man, youre quite a dork. Go out and enjoy the sunshine and smile a little  trust me, its not painful.
 
Now and then,
the Gibbler
 
posted by the Gibbler
 on January 13, 2007 #
 
I did an internship at Google and it was a very strange experience. When I finished, I didnt miss anything. Not the people, not the environment, not the work itself I left with the feeling that it had been too much trouble (months of interviews and ass licking) for so little satisfaction. The only benefit I can find for working at Google is the reputation you obtain, because of the image it projects.
 
I suppose one of the issues is that you need a certain mindset to fit into their culture. To me, Google looked too often like a cult of self-indulgent people that had been abused so much to get the job that lost all type of self-respect afterwards. To see people with PhD from top-rank universities working as code monkeys 12h per day, or MBAs doing payroll I dont know, I never got to understand it.
 
Another interesting fact that people from the outside dont realize is that, internally, many departments in Google are bordering disaster. Travel takes months to pay trip expenses. Payroll make constant mistakes. Security was taking two months to issue a badge. HR lost my documents several times and took months (literally) to issue an invalid contract (start date set on a Sunday).
 
posted by Mirrio
 on January 15, 2007 #
 
If theres any truth to Mirrios last post, the SEC will want to hear
about it.
 
posted by CPCcurmudgeon
 on January 16, 2007 #
 
Google hiring the very best, one day theyll wake up on the reality..this is a good article on this context
 
THE TALENT MYTH
by MALCOLM GLADWELL
Are smart people overrated?
http://www.newyorker.com/printables/fact/020722fa_fact?fact/020722fa_fact
 
posted by anonymous
 on January 23, 2007 #
 
Company culture aside, Id be more concerned with Googles long term strategy.  They are dominant in the text search market, have moved into the video market, and are making a ton of cash on ad revenue - but can the company truely realize its vision of organizing (and more importantly, capitalizing on) the worlds information?  If so, this company could truely change the world in a way MicroSoft only dreams of.  If not, how long until search becomes a basic commodity?
 
posted by 
 on January 24, 2007 #
 
I used to work at what I suppose you would call a respectable, mature establishment next door to Google Mountain View, and as a female in the sausage fest of the southbay I got to go visit over there (as if I didnt already go walk the campus on my lunch breaks).  Our abstract brick establishment was the epitome of class with the palm trees, water fountains, and priceless 25-foot Chihulhy piece in the lobbyit was miserable.  Just because a place looks respectable, has a decent product, or has staff movie night every other month doesnt make it a rewarding place to work.
 
They didnt shuttle us in, did not provide food, fun, benefits, massage, etc.  They didnt have to, none of those things are required or necessary.  But damn if every day that I had to squeal in there at 7:30 AM (late because unlike the shuttle I couldnt use the carpool lane) I didnt envy even the badge-checkers on every driveway at Google because they were greeted with smiles, given freebies, and treated with respect.  I quit that job and if I can I will go be a secretary for Google because I want to be able to say I am happy at work, as childish as it is.
 
posted by 
 on February 26, 2007 #
 
And finally she gave me
So, you didnt come up with this?
Someone else had to explain it to you?
Now, thats funny.
Tell me something I dont know.
 
posted by Cesar
 on March  5, 2007 #
 
I usually refrain from commenting in these posts, but since particular post is worth noting.
 
My philosophy happens to be, do whatever you want, however you want, whenever you want, as long as it gets results.
 
That sounds like a pretty childish statement to me. In fact it sounds downright infantile.
 
And Ive never even thought for a moment about clicking any online banner, let alone adsense
 
Hate to break the news, but (shh, banner ads run on a CPM network, they make money even if you dont click.)
 
A true infant pokes fun at others to gain attention.
 
posted by gmoney
 on March 12, 2007 #
 
Oh man! I would really love to work for Google! They are one of the huge corporate company that still has that core quality that I adore. :)
 
I sure hope I could work for them. :)
 
posted by McBilly
 on June 11, 2007 #
 
I dont understand who we are to criticise the way a  company takes care of its employees or bussiness, if you just dont like it  well go and look for another one who might be they way you like and apply for it.
 
posted by Gabriel
 on June 20, 2007 #
 
Hey, you make it sound as if no body actually want to work at Google and that they are affraid to leave the great big PLEX!
 
posted by Da Man
 on June 23, 2007 #
 
I believe youre also wrong on the assumption about the typical age of Googlers.  Until recently most hires had to have a few years of experience, so there is a gap in your thinking that they want to perpetuate the college life.
 
posted by Anon Dude
 on February  9, 2008 #
 
What is the problem of a company to make money? Has google ever bragged about being an organization that doesnt need to pay its employees? In order to pay their employees, they need to make money. It seems like a love-hatred/maybe jealous feeling about the company?
 
Yes, we all know that the management wants to create the faithfull employees or sometimes the ass kisser so they know their business is well taken care of or at least _ depending on the manager - like those who know nothing about their business, they would let their supervisors or employees do any sort of action so they arent bothered or even let alone. But talking about Google, it seems to offer more than most blood sucker/pennysaver companyes so,,, COME ON!!! Put yourself in their places!
 
Had you developed your own business, wouldnt ou be willing to have faithfull staff too? Probably too
 
If they are trying to make their employees happy, whats wrong with that? Why are they being pointed the spear when there are so many Enron type companies trying to mess  up with the employees lives? If some positive comments need to be addressed to Google, do so in a positive manner.
 
posted by Barb
 on February 20, 2008 #
 
From reading your article, it sounds like the perfect place for you to work at is somewhere who doesnt give you any perks whatsoever, forces you into a dark cube, doesnt feed you, or help out with your transportation to work. Seriously, you need to lighten up.
 
Google does all these things to keep their employees happy, and it doesnt even need to offer all the great things it does, such as free food, shuttles, gym, laundry, and so forth. Employees are some of the brightest individuals in the world. I dont see whats wrong with that. Your reasoning that it keeps them infantile is just bogus and sounds more like a remark from a bitter applicant who has been rejected by Fortunes top best place to work.
 
posted by 
 on March 27, 2008 #
 
Call me conservative but I dont like the Google Campus Environment at all - I think it would be annoying.
 
I wouldnt like to be subjected to Googles spend as much time as possible at your office and produce code for us in return we will treat you like a child culture.  Employers should be encouraging their employees to spend time outside of work with their friends and family as these are far more important.
 
I also note that when speaking to people who work for Google, if you wear a suit, because they know you are not one of them you are spoken down to - I wonder how immature and arrogant the community inside Google is with all those PhDs and so forth.
 
FYI Googlers, just because one does not spend every hour of his or her life slaving away for their employer - it does not make them any less of a person.  There is also much to see in life outside the Internet, despite what Google may have you believe.
 
posted by Geoffrey
 on May 17, 2008 #
 
I think that many of the criticisms that have been directed at Google in this article and many of its comments lack any meaningful substance. I would love to work in an environment where fun is not regarded as a sin and where food and recreational and other facilities are provided to employees. If only more companies were like that. I have worked in corporate suited environments where technical people have been regarded with contempt by sales and marketing people. It strikes me that this does not apply to Google.
 
Regarding the alleged weaknesses of GFS, I should like someone to name ONE type of file system which is totally free of problems, whether these are related to performance or reliability. I think that a file system which consists of such large blocks is amazing, and to have enough disk capacity to be able to use it to such effect is incredible.
 
(In order to pre-empt the usual abusive ad hominem remarks that are likely to be attracted by a comment such as mine, let me point out that I am old enough to be someones grandfather and I have  been doing UNIX and Linux and related troubleshooting and support and administration, etc., for more than two decades.)
 
Google seems to me to be a company which respects its employees, and catering to young peoples sense of fun does not mean infantilisation.
 
posted by Duncan Anderson
 on May 25, 2008 #
 
I have never been rejected by Google; never have worked there either, and no, as tempting as it sounds, I do not think I would.
But I had the pleasure to deal with some middle managers on a partnership, and I can tell you, their arrogance is simply unbelievable. On the surface, they appear to be a happy/friendly bunch of people. Their offices have Lava lamps, and free lunch. You see smiles galore. But once you start to DEAL with these people you realize how sinister they are. Creepy.
Cant go into details for obvious reasons, but the experience was very very unpleasant. Do no evil? Thats just utter B.S.
 
posted by Anon
 on June 24, 2008 #
 
Jealous, much? Googles employees are the masterminds of our generation. In my opinion, they deserve the special treatment. I think other companies should follow Googles example and make some serious changes in how they treat the backbone of their organizations. Im sure you wouldnt complain if you were smart and determined enough to, I dont know, actually work there instead of sitting at home stewing.
 
posted by Trish Parisy
 on September 24, 2008 #
 
Totally agree with you Aaron.  I work as a contractor at Google and it is offensive and discriminating to have the red badge.  Its like telling the world: look, I dont earn like you and have a short life here.
 
And I agree on the infantile working environment.  Its like a big kindergarten and I challenge you to find me someone with a bit of brain who genuinely likes the job he does at Google.  Its a massive call centre.
 
posted by Martin
 on March 23, 2012 #
 
You said something about the cynisism of hot-shot programmers. Your entire article is very cynical. Have you ever worked at Google? You say you have visited, but dont think that just because you have done as such qualifies you to criticize it. Personally, I love dinosaurs and I love ball pits. Perhaps if you didnt have such a big stick up your butt and maybe had a little fun once in a while, you could see that Google is trying to make life more interesting for the people it has employed. I saw this article and I gave you the benifit of the doubt. However, your claims have little to no substantiation and you have failed to completely back up any of your claims. Perhaps an interview with a google employee would have been better. Otherwise, you disgust me with your own infantilizing.
 
posted by Marie
 on April  8, 2012 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 12, 2006
 
Title: Eight Reasons (Some) Wikis Work
 
published at Personal Democracy Forum
 
The stunning success of Wikipedia in creating an encyclopedia from scratch has led many to believe that they can achieve similar results. (Want to get rich? Easy! Just install the MediaWiki software, title it how to get rich, and wait for the answers to start flowing in.)
 
Clearly the wiki approach does not solve every problem. So what made Wikipedia work so well? We cant say for certain, but by looking at similar sites that havent taken off  as well as those that have (like TV IV)  we can spot some patterns.
 
Clear goal. Wikipedia is an encyclopedia. Its an understandable task with a clear end result. When you want to know something, you know whether its the kind of thing that might be in Wikipedia or not. And when you want to contribute, you know what kinds of things to add. By contrast simply adding a wiki to your existing website has no clear purpose.
 
Worth doing. Collecting the sum of human knowledge in one place is just the kind of grand goal that inspires their people to sink their time into a big, collective effort. There are people on Wikipedia who spend their time going down long lists of computer-generated format and style errors, fixing each one by hand. Its hard to imagine people putting the same amount of effort into cleaning up a wiki about the greatness of Tide laundry detergent. But people are willing to do it for something only a few people care a lot about (like a very specialized technical topic) or something a lot of people care a little about (like a piece of popular culture).
 
Objective standards. Its pretty clear what an encyclopedia article should be. It needs to contain an explanation of what it is and why its important, the history, the uses (or actions), criticism, and pointers to more information. And the whole thing needs to be written in a plain, dry style. The result is that its pretty clear what needs to be done, which means everyone can work together to do it. Contrast this with a novel, where the books success depends on the authors creativity and, well, novelty.
 
Made from small pieces. Encyclopedias are huge projects, but theyre made up of manageably-sized articles. If an article ever grows too long, it can be split into parts (see Al Gore Controversies). When a page is small enough that the whole thing can fit comfortably in your head, its much easier to work with: you can write it in one sitting, you can read it relatively quickly, and you can remember the whole thing. Contrast this with books, which are so big that working seriously on them requires special dedication.
 
Each piece is useful. Each article in an encyclopedia is useful in its own right. Even if Wikipedia had just started and all it had was an article about the Striped Burrowing Tree Frog, that page would still be useful, just like every other page on the Internet about an obscure topic. The page, if it was good enough, would show up on the right Google searches and more Tree Frog fans would begin contributing to it. And if that page worked well, it could easily lead to others. Contrast this with a dictionary, which youre probably only going to use if it has a high percentage of the words you want to look up.
 
Segmented subjects. Few people are passionate about learning all human knowledge. But many more people are passionate about some subset of that. Encyclopedias allow the people who really care about French social theorists to spend all their time on that, without ever caring about the rest of the site. And the same is true of readers. The result is that lots of different people can work on lots of different parts, with the whole project getting done as a result, even though nobody worked on that explicitly. Contrast this with coming up with a theory, where the work requires understanding all the data and thinking about it as a whole.
 
Personally useful. The best way to understand something is to write about it and the best thing to write is a laymans explanation. An encyclopedia provides a opportunity to do just that. At the same time, it captures what youve learned in case you forget it later and gives the concept more form so that youre more likely to remember. By contrast, writing guides for children doesnt teach you much.
 
Enjoyable work. An encyclopedia mostly consists of people trying to explain things and explaining things can be quite fun. At parties, if you as someone about the problem theyve dedicated their life to, theyll gladly talk your ear off about it for hours. Wikipedia capitalizes on this tendency while also magnifying it  now its not just one partygoer, its the whole world listening. Contrast this with a project like categorizing all the pages on the Internet, which most people would find quite boring.
 
I came up with these principles just by thinking about why I use Wikipedia and not about specific examples of people who have violated them. So its a little surprising that it turns out to mostly be a list of wiki sites that havent exactly taken off: SourceWatch fails 1, vanity projects fail 2, Wikitorial failed 3, Wikibooks fails 4, Wiktionary fails 5, the over-specialized sites fail 6, Wikijunior fails 7, and Wikispecies fails 8 (at least as far as Im concerned).
 
Of course, even if you get all these things right, that says nothing about whether your site will succeed. Success requires more than just a good idea, it requires doing the hard work of actually making things happen. But thats a topic for another article.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 12, 2006
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 12, 2006
 
Title: Seven Habits of Highly Successful Websites
 
I got a phone call from my father the other day. Oh, I thought immediately, hes probably calling to finally apologize for failing to attend that basketball game I played at in fourth grade. But no, I was once again wrong. He was calling to pitch his web startup.
 
Theyre at the racquetball court, the grocery store, the venture capitalists offices  you cant avoid this new crowd of so-called Web 2.0 startups. And every time they meet you, if theyre not asking for angel funding, theyre asking for suggestions on how they should run their company.
 
For a long time, Id simply tell them they should ask a real expert, like Dr. Paulson Graham of the Institute of Advances Startup Studies, but the number of queries has become so great that Ive decided to conduct some research of my own.
 
I picked out seven recent extremely popular websites. While perhaps not having the mindshare of a Basecamp or a Ning, these websites do have the benefit of having tons of actual users. Here they are, ranked roughly in order of popularity:
 
I looked at all these websites to see what they have in common. Heres what I discovered.
 
With the single exception of Flickr, all these websites are hideous. Facebook and Wikipedia redesigned late in the game, upgrading their web design from hideous to barely tolerable, but MySpace has continued on, its name becoming synonymous with design so atrocious it has actually been known to induce vomiting in epileptic Japanese children. Not surprisingly, its the most popular site on the list.
 
Unlike most of Google, Google Maps actually isnt such a bad looking website in itself, but most of its Web 2.0 cred comes from its ability to make mashups in which people stick a Google Map with several hundred thousand different little red blurble icons sticking all over it onto a webpage whose design sense can best be described as MySpace knockoff. Normally I dont go in for guilt by association, but in this case I think its deserved.
 
Del.icio.us and Digg both attempted redesigns at one point but due to a tragic mixup in communication, the web design teams they hired misheard their instructions and thought their job was actually to try to make the site look worse instead of better. Having blown several thousand dollars of their VCs money on this enterprise, they had no choice but to launch the resulting look.
 
Lets start with MySpace. Again, just as its a leader in traffic, its a leader in this category. MySpace has so few features, I dont even know what it does. Neither, apparently, do its users, who in fact create MySpace accounts simply to impress their friends and annoy their teachers. (Personal communication)
 
The last time Wikipedia added a substantive new feature was the addition of categories a couple years ago and, frankly, that was a pretty bad idea because it was so poorly implemented. Otherwise its basically just been a big box you edit text in with a bunch of kluges on top. Thats how it got to be number two.
 
Facebook, Flickr, and Digg all add features occasionally, but theyre more than counteracted by Del.icio.us and Google Maps, which in fact have actively taken features away. Del.icio.us decided that tag intersections (finding links that are tagged with two words) was just too hard to get back online after they were purchased by Yahoo! and so they simply took the feature down without notice. The site spiked in popularity until they added them back the other day and traffic went down once again.
 
Google Maps, meanwhile, has just removed everything else from the page except for the map and the search box, ensuring no features get in between the user and their mapping experience. Like most Google software, though, features are definitely not going to be added.
 
None of the content on any of these sites is provided by the people who made the site. In every case, the content is provided by the users. The only exception is Google Maps, where the content is provided NAVTEQ.
 
Combined with the last principle, you might begin to suspect that this is simply because the developers of these sites are extremely lazy. But I dont believe that; I think theres a more complicated principle at work.
 
I believe in a theory Ill call The Stupidity of Crowds. Heres the basic idea: if just one person or a small group of people builds a website, they have to be at least moderately intelligent. Buying servers and writing programs is somewhat hard and takes a little bit of brainpower. This means that the content for their site will be similarly intelligent and thus it wont be of interest to the vast majority of Internet users.
 
The glorious thing about the Internet, however, is that it allows us to aggregate the combined stupidity of literally millions of people. No longer do you have to try to play towards the lowest common denominator  now you can actually have the lowest common denominator build your site for you. No single mortal could possibly come up with the content you find on the average MySpace, let alone the hideous color scheme, garish backgrounds, and awful auto-playing background music. No, something like that takes The Stupidity of Crowds.
 
Like 99.999999% of all websites on the Internet, none of these websites supports web standards, the documents that explain the proper way to use the Web. Enough said.
 
MySpace, Flickr, Del.icio.us, and Google Maps all sold out to larger companies. (Google Maps didnt even launch until after it was acquired.) Wikipedia is apparently some sort bizarre legal construction called a donation-funded non-profit and this apparently has made it hard to sell. (Note to future founders: make sure not to incorporate your company as one of these as it can severely hamper your options later on.)
 
Facebook and Digg havent sold out yet, but I bet they want to. (Another tip: taking large quantities of VC money also makes it hard to sell your company, both because it gives you a swelled head but also because it gives the VCs control over when you can sell, and their heads are really big.)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 12, 2006
 
Interesting you say that MySpace has few features. It seems like they are adding new tools and areas (recently listings, jobs, videos) all the time. In terms of social networks, they are well ahead of the pack feature-wise and technologically. As much as we hate MySpace for its horrible design and hacks, it is simply amazing how fast they move. Just my two cents.
 
posted by 
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Aaron, the only bad design is design that sends the wrong message. Would MySpace be as popular if it had a sleek, minimalist design? For Stupid looking for to gossip with friends, do you want your site to look intelligent? That would be like insisting the bar tenders at your dive bar wear slacks and blazers. Better design. Wrong message. Lost business.
 
Something else that I noticed: I know youre being sardonic, but it seems that sites arent successful because theyre ugly, have no features, or ignore standards. What I see is a pattern of indifference. That is, these attributes get lost in the noise of what makes the site successful.
 
Just off the top of my head, heres what I think matters most to users (in order)
 
1) Have I used this before?
2) Do my friends use this?
3) Does this do something I want with me having to think much about it?
 
Design sort of matters in 3. Features may be a toss-up (more usefulness versus more confusion), again in 3.
 
What really matters is 1 and 2, and if you can make it there, youre very forgiven for a too long time.
 
PROOF: AOL. QED
 
posted by Andrew Yates
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Sorry, thats:
 
1) Have I used this before?
 
2) Do my friends use this?
 
3) Does this do something I want without much thought
 
posted by Drew
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
I take offense at this post. I love the design of MySpace.
 
posted by Epiliptic Japanese Child
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Great post! (Personal communication) made me laugh out loud. Its reassuring  to see reddit upholding most of these vital principles too ;)
 
posted by matt
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
might want to change your headline to the 5 habits of 7 highly successful websites.
 
(i tell ya, theres just no truth in advertising any more ;)
 
nice post tho.
 
posted by dave mcclure
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
May I politely ask what profession your father is in? Meaning, is he in technology now - or is he just jumping on the bandwagon that is Web 2.0?
 
Other than that, your dark humor cynicism points out a larger theme the road to success is doing something original not necessarialy doing what everyone else is doing.
 
And the stupidity of crowds is pretty spot on!
 
posted by Webomatica
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Aaron this is brilliant and true.   Now, can I get you to invest 500k in new startup which I promise will be ugly, disorganized, and hard-work phobic?
 
posted by JoeDuck
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
I love your theory of the stupidity of crowds. In fact, I just learned that theres a mathematical explanation for it. Condorcets theorem postulates that groups are smarter the larger they are  provided that each individual member has at least a 51% chance of being right. But groups of ignorant people? Far stupider than any individual.
 
http://dylan.tweney.com/2006/12/07/the-idiocy-of-crowds/
 
Considering that most people on the Net are writing about something they know nothing about, all that adds up to a tremendous amount of stupidity.
 
posted by Dylan Tweney
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
How can you claim Wikipedia doesnt give a flip about standards? All of there stuff validates, just check W3C
 
Okay, I checked the others too. Google Maps validates too. Please check your facts.
 
posted by Jake
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
Okay, maybe Im just stupid. It was Flickr, not Google Maps.
 
posted by Jake
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
I loved this but the web phenomenon is mostly an extrapolation of popular culture in every form. Literature, Music, Movies. That which is ultra-popular is, err dumb.
The defining difference here is that while traditional popular culture has a one-to-many relationship, internet popular culture has a many-to-many relationship, to speak in db terminology.
Great piece.
 
posted by Ben Parzybok
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
Yeah, seriously, Im having a seizure like an epileptic japanese child here, without my reddit fix!!!  I hope nothing Conde-nasty has happened!
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on December 13, 2006 #
 
Interesting post although I would disagree and say that at the very least, Facebook has a nice, clean interface. Theyve also been rolling out neat features quite steadily for the last few months (or did you miss the News Feed debacle in September?). Theyve added blog-like notes (which allow you to import feeds), content-sharing a la digg, friend-finder (via your email address book), and the aforementioned News Feed. Their advertising is unobtrusive and minimal and I cant say Ive ever run into a serious bug on their site. It seems to me that theyve been the epitome of how to do things right by being quite dissimilar from MySpace, although I cant vouch for their code validating or their intent to sell.
 
posted by [name removed upon request]
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
You are a true moron who wants destroy the values of our beloved America.
Hamburgers and other stuffs are junk food that makes a lot of money for the companies which market them
 
The worst TV shows are the most successfull, the cars are destroying our country .and every citizen is allowed to poll whatever his QI is (or to be elected).
 
What do you want ? Introduce a dictatorship in America with no poll, no car, no TV bullshit and no hamburgers?
 
With your way to criticize the result of a group, you are going to make the people think that there are not completely master of their life even with polling and they are going to try to change what we, true patriots, are supporting.
 
With your way to criticize the people, in fact you want to introduce communism in our country because you are jealous of the guys who makes real money (Google, Mac, Microsoft, Haliburton, Wal-Mart.
 
posted by True patriot
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
MySpace has so few features, I dont even know what it does. Neither, apparently, do its users, who in fact create MySpace accounts simply to impress their friends and annoy their teachers. (Personal communication)
 
I started a MySpace profile just to annoy someone who works for me (true, really). Does that count?
 
posted by Chris Knott
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
Ok, just to be clear Im not a complete jerk, it was amuse and annoy. Guess you had to be there ;)
 
posted by Chris Knott
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
I once told Caterina Fake that I thought Flickr wasnt going to go anywhere because it was too generic, simple and clean. And besides, I and all my friends were using Fotolog (if you want to talk about gnarly, ugly sites). She is nice and has not brought that up around me too often since.
 
That said, I think youre mixing apples and oranges. Sure, Flickr (to stick with what I started with) has cut features over the years, but they were features a site dedicated to sharing photos doesnt need. I mean, its pretty obvious what Flickr does, and it does a whole crapload of that thing: what more do you want from it?
 
If theres one Web 2.0 principle thats more than buzzword bingo, its this idea that David Hannemeier Hanson has repeated over and over: take one simple idea, and work on it until it works well. All of the sites listed above do their jobs, even if their actual purposes isnt immediately clear, and even if using them makes people who care about design and elegance want to poke out their eyes with thorns.
 
MySpace is for teh kidz to keep in touch. Facebook is for MySpace users, only sort of older and semi-sanctioned by The Man. And so on. Back when Friendster was young, I could see the limitations of its simplistic social networking model all too clearly, and MySpace somehow manages to be even more dumbified than Friendster. But you know what? MySpace is good enough for teh kidz, and I realized a few years ago that I have more real-life friends than I can deal with anyway. Being able to accurately model the character and degree of my real-life relationships would be interesting, sorta, but it would be tough to scale, would go over most users heads, and would probably cause all kinds of havoc if it actually worked.
 
posted by Forrest L Norvell
 on December 16, 2006 #
 
Be Ugly
- ugliness increases approachability, because you wont think that this something else is better than you; instead, it belongs to you because its of a quality you, as amateur, couldve done yourself
 
Dont Have Features
- unclutteredness and minimalism, as opposed to portalitis, are the blessings of really useful tool websites; a hammer has little features too, and so does a pencil
 
Let Users Do Your Job
- allow a community to interact with your site sure, why not?
 
Ignore Standards
- realize that standards alone wont get you anywhere unless perhaps on a browser which really honors standards, but Im still waiting for that one to arrive
 
Build to Flip
- money makes the world go round? Seriously, I dont have an answer to that one. I think a lot of people trying hard to be bought will ultimately fail, for the right reasons.
 
posted by Philipp Lenssen
 on December 21, 2006 #
 
posted by kayode Olaofe 
 on September 20, 2007 #
 
I want some habits of highly successeful people to send to me
 
posted by Kayode Olaofe
 on September 20, 2007 #
 
I think the note about selling out is stupid.  Its somehow wrong to desire being bought by a company and making a ton of money?
 
I cant tell if this is sarcasm or not.  Yeah, Google Maps didnt launch until it was bought by Google.  Whats your point?
 
posted by Dave
 on January  8, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 12, 2006
 
Title: The Politics of Wikipedians
 
A film director named Jaron Lanier recently published an essay titled Digital Maoism. The essay is a dreadful mishmash of name-calling, whining, and downright incoherence, but insofar as Lanier has a point, it is this: people often attribute facts and claims to Wikipedia, as if it was some giant hive mind that combined all our individual thoughts into one group opinion. But, in reality, Wikipedia is simply written by people, people with individual voices and ideas. And technology is making us lose sight of that.
 
(I maybe doing Lanier too great a service by attributing such a coherent view to him as nothing quite so clear is ever actually expressed in the article. Nonetheless, I will continue as if this is Laniers view.)
 
It is an interesting point, but what Lanier finds so frightening is precisely what I find so exciting about these technologies. I still remember the light bulb that went off in my head when my friend Dan Connolly answered a question by saying According to Google, X is the case. Google had said no such thing, of course, but the Google algorithm had processed all the links on the Web and send Dan the page it thought most relevant to his query. It was this particular page that said X, of course, but the notion that Google itself was answering questions in this way was a revelation.
 
The same is true of Wikipedia. There are individual people, obviously, but what makes Wikipedia so fascinating are the technical and social processes that combine their work, turning it into something no individual person is responsible for or would necessarily endorse.
 
I often find myself wondering what Wikipedia would say about such-and-such a subject or how important Wikipedia thinks something else is. I refuse to edit my Wikipedia page, not only because its bad form, but because Im genuinely curious about how Wikipedia sees me. Its an odd thing, to think a site that anyone can edit actually has opinions or concerns or a point of view on the world, but it does, and its a fascinating one.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 12, 2006
 
If this were a wiki page, I would correct it to say Jaron Lanier is not a film director.
 
posted by Carl
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
A film director named Jaron Lanier 
 
Just to make clear, since irony doenst travel well on the net - that was a joke, right?
 
I think youre misreading the essay, understandable since hes a bit hard to follow. Hes basically talking about the downsides of collectivism here (something I really dislike about the fad for it, but is not going to be heard much).
 
You seem to be talking about anthropomorphizing an algorithmic result or process outcome.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
It was a joke.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
I actually thought Laniers article was really excellent! He challenges us to really think about the whole idea of online collectivism. At the end of the day, he is not against it in principle but simply warns that sometimes it can lead to the lowest common denominator. He then gives some tips on how to avoid this fate.
 
The other point to note is the really interesting discussion that took place around the original article. So I hope your readers will read Digital Maoism.
 
posted by Brendan Barrett
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Summary:
 
Sometimes, the extreme is one way, but the other extreme is another way. Other times, all of something is something, but ironically, very little of something else is something else. When you can magnitude the meta me myself, Google Myspace Myself should would something pedagogical.
 
posted by Andrew Yates
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 11, 2006
 
Title: The Politics of Wikis
 
Anarchism has a pretty bad rap. Put aside all the people who think its about smashing windows and shooting presidents and just focus on the idea (an arch  without rulers). If someone told you that you should start a business where basically no one is in charge of anything and everyone shares ownership of everything and all decisions are made by consensus, youd think they were a hopeless utopian about to get a large dose of reality. Yet thats pretty much what Wikipedia is.
 
Theres the obvious anarchism of wikis: namely, anyone can edit. No intelligence tests or approval rules or even a temporary probation. Anyone can just wander up and hit that edit button and get started. Where in the world can a random person get a larger audience?
 
Thats pretty radical in itself, but things go much deeper. Theres no ownership over text. If you write something, as soon as you post it to Wikipedia, its no longer yours in any real sense. Others will modify and mangle it without a second thought and anyone who quotes those words in the future will attribute them to Wikipedia and not to you. In a culture where directors are suing people for fastforwarding over the smutty scenes in their movies, thats pretty wild.
 
And while there are a few technical tricks to give some people more software features than others, for the most part the Wikipedia community is pretty flat. Every non-edit decision, from which pages get deleted to what the logo in the corner is, gets made by consensus with everyone getting a chance to have their say.
 
In real life, few people are willing to take such a radical stand. Even the farthest reaches of the far left hold back from proposing such extreme ideas, suggesting that not only that such extreme freedom wouldnt fly in a capitalist culture like ours, but that perhaps some of these restrictions are just necessary because of human nature. But its humans who edit Wikipedia, and mostly humans raised in capitalist culture as well. Perhaps its time to give more extremism a chance.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 11, 2006
 
Ownership here belies the same fundamental belief of Intellectual Property - that one can own a work, whereas the most you can really do it create it. See all free software, which is pretty similar to Wikipedia in that anyone can change the source how they want, just without Wikipedias self-effacing nature.
 
I realise youre aware of free software, but I just wanted to emphasize the points that a) freedom to fork implies anarchy b) if you cant fork (eg, with physical objects), anarchy becomes a lot harder.
 
posted by James
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Functioning anarchies have been around in the computer communications world for a long time now; I thought back in the early 90s that the usenet had proved itself to be a particularly successful example.
 
But is it really an anarchy when the community is excercising highly coercive methods of control over its members? Sure, anybody can edit a page on Wikipedia and put up whatever they want. But if its a viagra advertisement, or is not consdered to be POV-neutral by certain people, its going to be deleted immediately. And this is necessary for Wikipedia to be what it is; if they really let anybody do what they wanted to, rather than forcing people to follow the Wikipedia way, it would be a true anarchy, and would be useless as an encyclopedia.
 
So in terms of level and amount of coercion, theres not much difference between Wikipedia and a totalitarian state. So whats the real difference between these two things? One would be that youre allowed to leave the Wikipedia state if you want to, of course. But beyond that?
 
posted by Curt Sampson
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Wikipedia might ostensibly be flat, but Im not quite sure that it is in practice. Theres the group of regular users at Wikipedia whom, by virtue of expertise, experience or coercion have more control over content than another group of people whose contributions dont fit into what the other group upholds as model Wikipedianism. That looks like a hierarchy, albeit a fluid one, to me. That, and what can otherwise be a beneficial lack of individual ownership almost covers up the forces at play.
 
My question is, how do you draw a line such that Wikipedia is an example of (relatively) utopian self-policing and not totalitarianism?
 
posted by Jacqueline
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Server Farm Revolutionary Commune is no more an anarchy than such projects were anarchies. There is the Charismatic Leader, The Committee Of The Apparatus  and, frankly, the proletariat.
 
Its an anarchy like any corporation which is poorly managed is an anarchy!
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December 11, 2006
 
Title: Business Ethics
 
Moral Mazes (one of my very favorite books) tells the story of a company, chosen essentially at random, and through careful investigation from top to bottom explains precisely how it operates, with the end result of explaining how so many well-intentioned people can end up committing so much evil.
 
This weeks scene takes place inside a textile processing plant at Weft Corporation, where the companys poor low-paid workers are suffering from byssinosis. Byssinosis, also called Brown Lung Disease, is when your lungs fill up with cotton dust. Eventually your throat closes up and you suffocate to death. The company insists the whole thing is a stunt made up by Ralph Nader and other liberal do-gooders. But one day they change their tune:
 
Weft, as well as all the other large and medium-sized American textile companies, was actually addressing the cotton dust problem, but in a characteristically indirect way. As part of a larger modernization effort, the firm invested $20 million in a few plants where executives knew such an investment would make money.  The investment had the side benefit of reducing cotton dust levels  One manager who was in charge of the project  comments on whether dust control was a principal factor in the decision:
 
No, definitely not. Would any sane, rational man spend $15 million for a 2 percent return?  Now it does improve the dust levels, but it was that if we dont invest the money now, we would be in a desperate [competitive] position fifteen years from now.  It was on these bases that the decision was made.
 
Publicly, of course, Weft Corporation, as do many other firms, claims that the money was spent entirely to eliminate dust, evidence of its corporate good citizenship. Privately, executives admit that without the productive return, they would not haveindeed, given the constraints under which they operatecould not have spent the money. And they have not done so in several other plants and only with great reluctance, if at all, in sections of otherwise renovated plants where it is more difficult to  achieve simultaneous cost and dust reduction.
 
(Robert Jackall, Moral Mazes, 158f)
 
What does Jackall mean that the executives could not have spent the money  given the constraints under which they operate? Another story in the book about the chemical corporation Alchemy illustrates his point:
 
Consider, for instance, the case of a large coking plant of the chemical company. [Coking is a chemical process for distilling coal.] Coke making requires a giant battery to cook the coke slowly and evenly for long periods; the battery is the most significant piece of capital equipment in a coking plant. In 1975, the plants battery showed signs of weakening and certain managers at corporate headquarters had to decide whether to invest $6 million to restore the battery to top form. Clearly, because of the amount of money involved, this was a gut decision.
 
No decision was made. The CEO had sent the word out to defer all the unnecessary capital expenditures to give the corporation cash reserves for other investments. So the managers allocated small amounts of money to patch the battery up until 1979, when it collapsed entirely. This brought the company into breach of contract with a steel producer and into violation of various Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pollution regulations. The total bill, including lawsuits and now federally mandated repairs to the battery, exceeded $100 million. I have heard figures as high as $150 million, but because of creative accounting, no one is sure of the exact amount.
 
This simple but very typical example gets to the heart of how decision making was intertwined with a companys authority structure and advancement patterns.  Had they acted decisively in 1975in hindsight, the only substantively rational choicethey would have salvaged the battery and saved their company millions of dollars in the long run.
 
In the short run, however, . they would have been taking serious personal risks in restoring the battery.  their political networks might have unraveled, leaving them vulnerable to attack.  A manager at Weft Corporation reflects:
 
People are always calculating how others will see the decisions they make.  They know that they have to gauge not just the external   market consequences of a decision, but the internal political consequences. And sometimes you can make the right market decision, but it can be the wrong political decision.
 
(Mazes, 81-84)
 
Had the manager in charge of the plant with the ailing battery done the replacement, his department would be six million dollars less profitable. When it came time to compare managers for the next promotion, he would seem massively less efficient than the guy running the plant next door. Hed be passed by and his corporate ascendency would be over.
 
Corporate managers simply arent allowed to be moral, or even reasonable. And those who try are simply weeded out. Not only does the manager who replaced the battery get passed over for the job; the manager who was obedient enough not to gets promoted to a more powerful position.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December 11, 2006
 
The idea that corporate management rewards bad behavior isnt especialy novel. Off the top of my head, I cant think of a single TV show set in a business that doesnt revolve largely around that cliche. So to dig a little deeper, why doesnt the market correct this problem?
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on December 11, 2006 #
 
Nice anecdotes.  A free-market capitalist could just as easily dig up examples of corporations behaving ethically.
 
posted by Mark
 on December 11, 2006 #
 
The Chicago futures markets are about 3 times larger than the New York stock exchange and NASDAQ combined.
 
I think the fact that time is not an essential component of stocks, and that time is an essential part of futures, is the major reason why stock markets are not efficient.  Regardless of what the market masturbators would have you believe.
 
Being on the back side of peak sweet crude forces efficiencies that could be neglected previously.
 
I am confident that all capital markets will move to a futures model.
 
And, all businesses will have to move to a futures model of accounting.  It would make stupidity like the neglected battery less likely.
 
Anyway, quit whining.  The same time businesses will be forced to introduce time into their accounting will be the perfect time to also introduce morals and human excellence into business accounting (the accounting system is practically the only way to enforce interests).  Stop whining and help me with ideas of how this new accountancy will work.
 
I need the answer for my own vile capitalistic purposes, so I am not acting out of pure altruism.  But a workable system would have the benefit of not perversely, systematically, stupidly destroying capital and humans and human dignity.
 
Anyway, I command you to work on my problem, and give me an answer, or at least some ideas, data, and studies I can work with.  You can write them up over the next couple of days on this blog, I realize you are busy.  The general question is: why wont people drop what they are doing and work at my command, when I comment to their blogs, clearly stating my needs?  I really dont understand these internets at all.
 
posted by manuelg
 on December 11, 2006 #
 
Both of these stories show how large human organizations fail.  None of these failings are related to the fact that they are businesses, only to the fact that they are human organizations.
 
The WAY that they fail is related to the system they are working with.  Police departments are rarely brought down by accounting scandals, they typically fail by abuses of power, theft, or corruption.  Churches typically fail by people taking advantage of their socially powerful positions to abuse the weak, and often they have the same close the ranks attitude of the police.  Churches that dont have vows of poverty also tend to fall into embezzling.  Social workers fail by neglecting their charges.  Politicians fail through bribery.
 
Regarding the brown lung, Im a bit skeptical of the story.  Facemasks are cheap and easy to use.  Using facemasks in a dusty environment is common.  What is also common, is for workers to decide that the masks are annoying and distracting, so they dont wear them.  Facemasks, wrist guards, lifting belts, I have seen them all provided to workers before, and I have seen them all taken off by the employees because they felt they didnt need them.  Line managers arent that far removed from the employees, and often think the same way.  Ive been working here for 10 years and I havent had any problems.
 
Strong oversight, rather than morality, is what is needed.  Oversight for business comes from, in the first place, proper accounting practices.  Its difficult to make decisions when people are blind.  Pushing managers to make quarterly numbers is a normal human failure of long-term planning.  Proper accounting should highlight that.  Of course, if managment chooses to ignore it, then there is not much you can do.  The best way to refresh moral thinking, is to remind them that someone is watching.
 
posted by William Crim
 on December 11, 2006 #
 
I concur with William Crim regarding accountability; I think these cases are also an argument for decentralization. Similar examples may be found in governmental and non-governmental organizations and religious hierarchies, which all exhibit the same kinds of behavior.
 
posted by Jim Lippard
 on December 11, 2006 #
 
Scott: Because the market is an individualized group of people searching for the short-term gain. They weed out the companies that think longer-term, not encourage them.
 
Mark: Its not an anecdote. The company was selected pretty randomly and studied quite thoroughly. Indeed, if there is a bias, its toward the company being too nice: it was one of the few that agreed to participate in the study. If this company has such serious problems, chances are they all do.
 
Id like to see an anecdote of ethical behavior that isnt similar thinly-disguised self-interest. To be fair, lets take the 42nd company (a nice, safely random number) on the Fortune 500 list: Lowes Home Improvement.
 
Norman: The book does give some examples of ethical behavior. Then it shows how that ethical behavior was brutally stamped out and all the people responsible fired.
 
William: What makes you think these are human failures? Theyre institutional failures. Are you seriously suggesting that Brown Lung Disease is made up? Do you think someone modified the archives of the New York Times to complete the hoax as well?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
You should read Chris Argyriss Overcoming Organizational Defenses. Some of his other books are better known, this happens to be the one I read (got it for a $1).
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
I dont doubt Brown Lung disease, and I never said I did.  I doubt that the danger to employees is entirely due to corporate greed, which was the point of your post.  Personaly safety measures that are uncormfortable and annoying tend to be circumvented by employees, just as onerous IT security policies are circumvented.
 
Even if the employees chose NOT to protect themselves, any illness related to Brown Lung would be the legal fault of the company.  However, I cant be morally outraged, since the dangers of Brown Lung are well known in cotton country.(Even before it had the name.)
 
I declare them human failure, rather than corporate failure, because they are not specific to corporations.  They are failures of human organization that appear in ANY organization as it gets larger.  The solution is the same in every case, increased vigilance by management and/or outside oversight.  I have rarely found a criticism of corporations that didnt apply equally well to other large organizations.
 
posted by William Crim
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Hey, Aaron I had some thoughts about this after watching the movie The Corporation.
 
See http://wolog.net/62097.html .
 
Excerpts:
 
Corporations are specifically incentivized to become engines of externality maximization.
 
The state should be able to incarcerate corporations.  Under the threat of conviction, big companies would start breaking up into ethically manageable sizes rather than profitably manageable sizes.
 
What do you think?
 
posted by Ka-Ping Yee
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
A small random sample is really not different from an anecdote.  Sure, the sample may be random in the context of a single study, but it is not random in the context of what books youve read.    Theres a selection bias occurring, by which a book that randomly examined two or three companies and found that they behaved ethically would not make its way on to your reading list.  (the fact that the sample is small means that all sorts of contradictory findings can be found by different authors with high probability.)
 
You are arguing a very general point (Corporations guarantee unethical behavior) from very shaky grounds, specifically:
 a) Some horrifying stories found in a very small sample of companies.
 b) A specious argument about how the stock market works, predicated on the easily contestable assumption that publicly traded companies never think long-term.  (The easiest counter-examples come in the form of large scale engineering efforts that take as many as 10 years to produce profits.  These cannot be done in a short-term fashion, yet publicly-traded companies still do them.  Why?)
 
And yet, you expect us to agree with you based on some stories told about supposedly randomly selected companies in one book?  Certainly coorporations behave very badly at times.  But to claim that they are inherently and irredeemably evil is just laughably simplistic.
 
posted by Mark
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
Scott:
 
The market doesnt correct the problem because corporations insulate decision makers from the consequences of their decisions, or, in other words, because the government that grants limited liability to certain kinds of business doesnt allow the market to work.
 
This is intrinsic to the idea of a limited liability entity, and limited liability is where the problem is.
 
posted by Randall Randall
 on December 14, 2006 #
 
I too am a little skeptical of the brown lung story, due to the ease of obtaining face masks.
But still agree that there are problems, not just in corporate America, but in big Government as well.
The point Corporate managers simply arent allowed to be moral, or even reasonable. And those who try are simply weeded out. Not only does the manager who replaced the battery get passed over for the job; the manager who was obedient enough not to gets promoted to a more powerful position is well taken. My own business dealing as a production manager was very frustrating. The upper manage took a bottom up approach to all problems, that is that all problems could be fixed by getting more out of the lazy staff. My opinion was the opposite, I believe leadership starts at the top and no manager is better than anyone else (that is not to say that managers do not have more responsibilities that deserve a higher pay). When managers treat the staff with respect and like human beings and not like children who should be seen and not heard, productivity will and does improve. Compare United Airlines (bad) to Jet Blue (good) for a good case study.
 
posted by Carl Strohmeyer
 on December 26, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December  7, 2006
 
Title: Competition of Experimentation?
 
It should be clear to anyone who has studied the topic that the way to drive innovation forward is to have lots of small groups of people each trying different things to succeed. In Guns, Germs, and Steel, for example, we see that certain societies succeed because geography breaks them up into chunks and prevents any one person with bad ideas from getting control of too much, while other societies fail because their whole territory can too easily be captured by an idiot.
 
It might at first seem more efficient to let the whole territory be captured by a genius, but a moments reflection will show that there are few geniuses whose brainpower can match the combined results of many independent experiments. This has fairly obvious applications to business and other fields, but for a moment lets just think about the concept itself.
 
This idea is often presented as a defense of competition and the capitalist market system that embraces it. Innovation only happens, such people say, when lots of people are competing against each other for the prizes of success. In a communist country, where Big State decides what will be worked on and how, there is no incentive to innovate. Only in a country like ours, where the victor gets the spoils, can new technology be developed.
 
And yet we also know that competition is a terrible way to get people do well. In No Contest: The Case Against Competition (now out in an elegant 20th anniversary edition) we see dozens of studies that show that, by all sorts of metrics, peoples performance (and enjoyment) goes down when they are forced to compete. Even worse, it goes down most notably for creative tasks  precisely the kind of thing involved in innovation.
 
How do we resolve the contradiction? The key is to notice that competition, especially market competition, isnt the only way to encourage experimentation. And thats often hard to do, because typically market competition is treated as the only sensible form of competition and competition as the only sensible form of experimentation. But thats not at all the case.
 
Instead of providing a prize for winner, we could provide rewards to everyone who tries. And that actually makes sense  not only because prizes also decrease productivity and creativity  but also because, when it comes to experimentation, its not really your fault if the experiment doesnt work. In fact, we want to encourage people to try crazy things that might not work, which is exactly why rewards are so counterproductive.
 
But even if you dont give an explicit prize, competition is still unhealthy. Contrary to what the apologists for market theology would like you to believe, people do not work better when theyre terrified of the guy next to them finding the solution first. Which is why we should look at this as simply experimentation, not competition.
 
Experimentation can certainly be carried out cooperatively. Imagine many different scientists in a lab, each trying different ideas during the day, swapping notes and tips over lunch, perhaps joining together to form small groups for certain experiments, or perhaps helping with little pieces of other projects in which they have particular expertise. Each scientist may disagree on which is the right direction to pursue, but that doesnt make them enemies.
 
Thats the way that science progresses. And, if you let it, other things too.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December  7, 2006
 
Are you sure you arent over-generalizing? Although rewards and prizes may decrease productivity when it comes to learning things, or working on intellectually sexy projects, that cant be true for everything. And arent most things (even on the innovative side) not all that intellectually interesting?
 
Or am I misunderstanding what youre implying we should apply these ideas to?
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on December  7, 2006 #
 
The studies I cite are pretty general. Certainly there must be exceptions, but if you read the books youll see theyre much rarer than youd think.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December  7, 2006 #
 
As Guns, Germs and Steel also points out in the chapter on domesticable animals, there is no factor which makes an animal domesticable. But there are any number of different factors which alone will make the animal un-domesticable.
 
Similarly, there is no one factor that will encourage innovative behavior. A certain percentage of the population is creative and productive, and doesnt really need any incentive to be so. However, there are many factors which will suppress this natural urge.
 
A big one is the apathy of ones peers. Another big one is the lack of resources (money, tools or connections) which a person needs to take something from idea to experiment to result. The need to fulfil the daily grind to earn ones bread might seem like another one, but it depends on how much of ones enery is lost to this activity. Einstein worked in the patent office, for example.
 
posted by Gordon McNutt
 on December  7, 2006 #
 
Each scientist may disagree on which is the right direction to pursue, but that doesnt make them enemies.
 
Thats sort of a fantasy-land idea of science.  Rivalries among scientists and mathmeticians are just as bitter as any other.  (Newton/Liebniz, Teller/Oppenheimer, Kronecker/Cantor, and so on).
 
Aside from that, I have two questions about your thesis:
 
posted by Mark
 on December  7, 2006 #
 
Im a bit driven to distraction by the discussion of what capitalists are supposed to believe. Even the most ardent free-marketeer would have to admit that the Soviet Union, the epitome of top-down decisionmaking, was still able to develop many new technologies, particularly in the areas of nuclear weapons and space travel. The question is which approach is optimal. It also represents a poor understanding of market competition to insist that being forced to compete and the terror that entails is necessarily preferable to being simply free to compete, which can be a laid-back affair. And many rewards are non-monetary. You may help develop a lasting idea for little or no pay, yet still be rewarded in prestige. Rewards also include the much greater satisfaction you derive from helping to develop something that works than something that doesnt.
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on December  7, 2006 #
 
we could provide rewards to everyone who tries
 
Trying something new is its own reward.
 
The only way you can stop people from trying to invent new sources of value is to punish/kill them for trying.
 
And there are plenty of social organizations that will punish/kill you for trying.
 
If you dont sell yourself into wage-slavery, and if you are not currently in the cross-hairs of the thugs with machine guns, you will notice resources to nurture and disseminate discovery, far beyond what Galileo had access to.
 
Otherwise, you have to keep your head down, and hope you are found out only after it is too late.
 
But I agree with you, the best that can be said about the competitive capital markets (considered along with the societal, legal, and governmental frameworks that actually make the market possible) is that they punish only a percentage of people who are trying to invent new sources of value.  They dont manage to punish 100%.  Yet.
 
posted by manuelg
 on December  8, 2006 #
 
I disagree.
 
Consider the subject of automated vehicles.  This is somewhat of a sexy field, and many groups have worked on it over time, with mixed results.
 
Enter the DARPA Grand Challenge.  Many teams, lots of work, 2 years, and now we have vehicles that can travel 100 miles autonomously.  There are limitations, but this contest had a huge impact on the progress in this field.
 
The Ansari X-Prize worked equally well, and several of the contestants are still developing their projects, even though the contest was won some time ago.
 
I havent read the books cited, but these are two rather significant counter examples.
 
posted by mp
 on December  8, 2006 #
 
Aaron, I find that you generally have a utopian vision of how science works. Ive been to labs that so hyper-competitive that the lab boss assigns the same project to different members of the lab, where it is expected that whoever gets the project working first gets all the glory.
 
In science, publishing first is so important, because sometimes you are unable to publish if the result is too close to something that is already published. Ive seen grad students lose years of work by being pipped to the finishing line in publishing.
 
I can name you rivalries in my field, where bombastic assholes hold important positions in university hiring committees, grant committees. These people hold real power in terms of providing resources and recognition to advance their competitors career. This holds for advancing the interests of vulnerable postdocs as they make their up the acadmeic ladder.
 
And science is becoming way less collegial and more cut-throat. Across the board, its expected that only 10% of postdocs will get a professorship. And thats a conservatively high figure.
 
posted by Bosco
 on December  8, 2006 #
 
What Bosco said might be tradition of university.
 
Academic Charisma and the Origins of the Research University by William Clark
 
In New Yorker there was a review article - last month? by Anthony Grafton of this book and , also of course its on Amazon,
 
Noel Malcolm wrote same thing about the filed of Liberal Arts.
 
posted by follwo up
 on December  8, 2006 #
 
sorry, mistyped.
 
filed > field
 
posted by follow
 on December  8, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December  5, 2006
 
Title: The City with No Heart
 
[Wheres the heart of LA?]
 
CAL: The Hollywood sign.
 
DANNY: Its the most viewed sign in the world, it beats the Eiffel Tower. And dont say the Santa Monica pier.
 
CAL: Downtown.
 
DANNY: Downtown isnt where L.A. is.
 
CAL: Its not. L.A.s on Sunset between Doheny and Highland. Its the Sunset Strip, and Wes knew that because he put that right in the title.
 
DANNY: Hey, I would love to do the Strip, but if you think about it, its made up almost entirely of billboard ads.
 
(Aaron Sorkin, The Option Period, Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip)
 
Flying over Los Angeles is strange. For a while theres nothing but mountains. Then a few curving strips of conformist suburbia. And then, all of a sudden, there it is. Rows and rows of building with no apparent structure or direction, just going everywhere at once. Unlike every other city Ive seen from the air, LA has no gradient surrounding a downtown. It just suddenly appears and then is simply there.
 
Downtown looks about the way youd expect. Lots of tall buildings, studded with odd landmarks like the new Gehry-designed concert hall and a giant ocean liner-looking building which we determined to be the DMV. (Only in California does the DMV get its own ocean liner, someone says.) But this wasnt really LA, my guide explained. Downtown is just hollowed out factories and sweatshops. Gentrification is coming, but its only at the very early stages. We pass an American Apparel sweatshop. American Apparel is a Rebel Company the staid building reads in Spanish.
 
We zip past old and new buildings while zooming on the freeway and head to Venice, a land of small streets and surprisingly-elegant beach shacks. The famed Venice Beach looks just like youd imagine  LA always makes you think you are imagining  with shirtless skateboarders and gritty little shops and the beautiful blue ocean up against the clear blue sky  both so vast, so endless.
 
I lie down on the sand and close my eyes. When youre trying to relax, everyone always says to imagine youre on the beach by the ocean with the sun streaming down upon your face. But here I actually am and I still cant relax. Instead, I wonder about the fractal nature of coastlines  does their length grow with out bound or simply converge as you measure them more finely? (It grows without bound.)
 
My host is danah boyd, the beautiful young academic superstar who has won fame and fortune formalizing the teens on MySpace, then reporting her findings at conferences in wildly colorful outfits with youthful enthusiasm. Shes living an academic dream  a one bedroom house by the beach filled with books, with a handsome but quiet young boyfriend to drop by on occasion.
 
But such a life is not all relaxation. Shes editing special editions of journals, keynoting conferences, submitting papers hither and yon, consulting on teen issues for major corporations, and interviewing kids for her research. Even The OReilly Factor is in on the racket, asking her, in that rhetorical way OReilly has of interviewing guests, whether MySpace is a dangerous den of online sexual predators. (It is never mentioned that OReillys parent company has purchased MySpace.)
 
danah delights in pushing academic boundaries: skipping classes, skipping town, spelling her name in lower case, wearing crazy clothes, studying the subcultural and new. And the rest of the field is scrambling to catch up with her, finally holding conferences and submitting papers on the sites shes been studying for years. I should become an academic, she says. Shake up the system just like her. But why join the system in the first place?, I say.
 
Shes got a fellowship down here this year along with Cory Doctorow, who shows up, arms wide, in a beaten leather jacket and a skullish t-shirt. We grab barbecue down the street, taking Corys car (the first one hes bought in his 35 years), outfitted with fuzzy seats and new plates that read COPYFYT.
 
Cory hates San Francisco, but loves it here, where he gets to teach classes with names like Pwned: Is everyone on this campus a copyright criminal? The freeway is fast, he says, the light rail usable, the cities surprisingly walkable. Disneyland is close by and there is plenty of 50s kitsch. And its far cheaper living here than in London.
 
Cory is his usual flurry of activity  working on six books, teaching two classes, running one of the most popular blogs, fighting for our digital civil liberties, while still managing to keep up with all the gossip. He hands me an advance proof of a book to read and recommends another hes in the middle of. And on his way out he stands, framed in the doorway, and offers me a piece of advice.
 
You know, he says, Wired really isnt so bad. Its an exciting time in tech industry  the cost of starting a company has fallen drastically  and youre at the center of it. I would have loved to have a job at Wired when I was 18. Wired was very different when you were 18, I say. Yeah, I suppose so, he says. I guess I wouldnt want a job there now  but then again I wouldnt want a job anywhere.
 
And then hes off.
 
As Cory leaves Jeremy Iversen arrives. Iversen is an incredibly odd fellow. With a background in everything from investment banking to neurotheology, he came to my attention with his 2006 book High School Confidential. With a novelists snark and an ethnographers attention to character and institutional detail, he went undercover to a Southern Californian high school for a half a year and wrote the whole thing down with a rare authorial brilliance. (My review.)
 
Now the books out and hes moved on again. This time hes trying to join Hollywood, perhaps play himself in the movie version of the book. He is sleek and abnormally attractive, but I learn this is the result of a spectacularly careful regimen. Every four hours he takes a carefully measured amount of food out of a cryopack in his car, pretty much the only food he is permitted. Then he follows a daily three-page jargon-laden series of instructions from his trainer about which exercises to perform and how at the gym. This, combined with cold reading and audition classes, is now his job.
 
It seems like a waste, but just like danah likes messing with institutions, Jeremy likes trying new things. Ive done a fiction book, Ive done a nonfiction book, Im done with writing, he says. Fair enough; Jeremy amazes me with his many talents. Aside from his good looks, his thoughtful eye, and his talent for writing, hes one of the smarter people Ive spoken to lately, cracking jokes about Yugoslav loyalty and information-theoretic channel errors.
 
He also has amazing interpersonal skills. While danah and Cory bowled me over with their energy, leading me to sit quietly while they braindump news and gossip, Jeremys energy somehow invites my own, leading me to crack jokes and make snarky comments right along with him. Perhaps this guy truly can do anything. Although that only leads to another question: why?
 
I hop in Jeremys car (the very same the kids in his book were in!) and he takes me on a tour of the city. First stop is Santa Monica and the Santa Monica Pier, home to a sewage treatment plant (which lots of signage brags about) and the fortune telling machine that kicked off the plot in Big (I didnt have a quarter to get my fortune, sadly). The crosswalk machines here talk and the stupid shopping mall jobs inspire television pilots. There are large topiary dinosaurs along a promenade with gingerbread houses underneath them to suggest Christmas. (Since the weather doesnt change, the city has to indicate the season in more blatant ways.) There is an entire store dedicated to selling things to geeks, with golden chess pieces mixed in among the lightsabers and Lord of the Rings figurines. The wealthy pretty things stroll back and forth.
 
Meanwhile in Westwood, home of UCLA, we see more shops and Fox Theater, home to many important movie openings. The students sit in cafes, pretending to work but actually checking Flickr, while Jeremy insists I get a tazo milk tea with boba. I do, against my instincts, and, to my surprise, its actually quite good. Then we go back to strolling around LAs imitation of a college town. In most places college towns are kind of a step up from the surrounding environs, but in LA it seems the town is trying to slum down a bit to fit the mold.
 
We head to Beverly Hills, singing the appropriate songs (living in Beverly Hills), and get out to stroll along the famed Rodeo Drive. A giant nude torso inexplicably welcomes us to a strip with shops so upscale that the streetlights have been replaced by chandeliers in glass boxes. Well-dressed women carry their fashionably tiny dogs in Prada bags while trendy young people sit in trendy restaurants, looking vaguely unhappy.
 
Side streets curve off into a world of cobblestone steps even more immaculately clean than the main drag  not a speck of dirt can be found anywhere. And then we find ourselves in the most bizarre three-story mall contraption, with an elevator that goes two floors above any surrounding buildings, three restaurants bathing unhappy people in pink, orange, and green light respectively, closed shops selling pink, orange, and green boxes, and a large glassed-in bedroom suspended literally in the center of it all, with no apparent way to get in. Jeremy was convinced we were in some kind of adventure game  if only we deliver the pink boxes to the people in pink and so on, wed unlock the elevator which would bring us to the key to get into the magic bedroom. But then the polygons stopped rendering so smoothly and we decided to move on, as I begun to wonder if Id stepped into some Virtual Reality simulation.
 
Everything in LA looks so, well, cinematic. I always thought that filmed stuff looked better than my stuff because they used fancy lights, cameras, and lenses to give it that more lushful aesthetic. But apparently all you really need to do is turn your camera on in LA  everything here gives off that hyperreal, oversaturated vibe.
 
And the people are all characters too. When I went down to Venice Beach, I saw attractive women sunbathing on towels while reading scripts. While walking back, I heard a couple guys excited that the casting director had actually called them back this time. The only other people I saw on the street with identifiable occupations (and there are a shocking number of people wandering around the street in the middle of the day with no identifiable occupation) were the immigrant landscapers busily trimming hedges on the houses of their betters.
 
I walked a block too far on the way back and ran into a more dingy neighborhood by a runned-down church. I looked around, trying to get my bearings, and a poor-looking black man on a bicycle with a cup rode up. Sorry, I said, assuming he wanted me to place some money in his cup. Can I help you find anything? he asked. No, I said. Whatre you doing? he asked. Just looking around, I said. Looking for anything in particular? he asked. No, I said. Looking for crack? he asked. No, I said again, and he biked off.
 
Crack is our number one industry, Jeremy says, with entertainment and shipping as our secondary sectors. Apparently the whole city does coke, perhaps the one thing that unites these disparate neighborhoods, this collection of varied enclaves each with their own name and culture that we call Los Angeles. Not all of them, Jeremy explains, are even part of Los Angeles City. Some of them have received special dispensation to carve out their little plot of land and get their own mayor. Santa Monica even elected a Green.
 
We head towards Sunset, stopping to see a large bubbling pit of tar in the middle of the city, right next to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA), where even more high society people are standing around looking unhappy, glassed in from the rest of the world  and the tar.
 
We also stop to see the worlds tallest Christmas tree at The Grove shopping mall. Aside from one of the early flagship Apple stores, the Grove also has a trolley to take people around the outdoor mall. Theres little objective need for the trolley  the mall isnt that big  but, as Jeremy says, it just adds to the surreality. To complete the picture, I couldnt resist purchasing a cinnamon sugar pretzel.
 
And then we head to Sunset. There is the Laugh Factory, where Michael Richards recently dealt a large blow to his career. There are trendy clubs and music spots. And there are, of course, billboards; plenty of billboards, advertising this and that as the street curves every which way.
 
Soon things start to calm down and its time for Jeremy to drop me off and hit the gym. We turn around, waving goodbye to all that. And thats LA! he says, as I clutch my chest and feel like my head is about to explode.
 
The afternoon before I have to leave, Im lying on the couch, my headache failing to fade. Time rolls forward and I notice from the orange glow leaking through the window that im gonna miss the sunset yet again. I hop out and run the four blocks to the beach as fast as I can, dodging traffic all the way.
 
When I get there the sun has fallen below the horizon but framed before me is the majestic beach picture Ive always seen in photos. The darkened sand, the glowing water, the crimson orangered strip fading up and to the edges, as if the sun had set directly in front of where Im now facing.
 
I run towards the water and the lights and sounds and people of the city all fall away and I find my self entirely alone with the ocean. The waves run right up to the edge of my toes but dont touch them. I stand, its colors and sounds enveloping my entire field of vision, its scent filling my nostrils. I breathe in deeply.
 
The reflected sunlight before me refracts to form a perfect rainbow, strips of dark red fading into orange fading into yellow then light blue then blue. And for one beautiful moment, before the whole thing fades away into an inky blackness, the colors are laid out perfectly, just the way Ive seen them in prisms and diagrams so many times before, a beautiful sympathy of color. And then my head really does explode, the beauty sending shockwaves through my body.
 
That is how I will remember LA: this beautiful strip of sunset.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December  5, 2006
 
Almost Famous 2.0?
 
Our Man In SOMA?
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on December  6, 2006 #
 
You write very well, have you thought of doing a book?
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on December  7, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December  4, 2006
 
Title: The Genius is in the Details
 
As best as we can tell, the human brain works by mastering a specific thing and then giving it a name, wrapping the whole thing up into a bundle and pushing it down a level, so that things can then be built with it as a component. You see this all over the place  its how science works, its how you program, its even how people deal with their friends (lets do the mall again).
 
So it would seem natural to think that smart people would work on a very high level, dealing not in details but in huge abstractions. They would have turned everything into a component, no longer worrying about its details, and built things out of the results.
 
Bizarrely, this seems entirely untrue. The smartest people I know disdain abstractions, preferring to speak in concrete specifics. Take Paul Buchheit, the genius behind Gmail. When he talks about building web applications, he doesnt think about high-level things like the underlying semantic structure of the data  instead he talks about the little heads that read data off of the hard disk and how fast they can move.
 
Another friend, also incredibly bright, doesnt refer to other people that way. He doesnt say oh, hes an expert in X or hes really smart about X; instead he says hes thought a lot about X  breaking down the abstractions of expertise and intelligence into something much more concrete: spending time thinking about something.
 
At first glance these seem like mistakes. Why should a brilliant web app programmer be thinking about hard disk heads? Isnt that something someone else should take care of? And why is my smart friend only concerned with how much time someone has spent on something? Arent there other factors involved?
 
But if you look the other direction, you see the same pattern. Clueless business guys love speaking in big abstractions, talking about information superhighways that act as more efficient content delivery systems that will monetize the genre by disintermediating the legacy players. These guys are speaking exactly as you would expect smart people to  thinking at a high level, working with the big ideas  yet the things they say are so incredibly stupid that they either dont mean anything or mean something thats actually impossible.
 
So whats going on here? As we noted at the beginning, the brain works by mastering the details and then giving them a name. But the business guys took the easy way out: they just mastered the names. If you asked them exactly how a content delivery system worked, they wouldnt be able to tell you. They know only the high-level thing, with none of the details.
 
And its the details that make it so interesting  and so powerful. Anyone can master the names of big concepts and combine them like so many puzzle pieces; its knowing how they work that takes time. And the smart people have made that investment. So perhaps its just natural that they want to stay it a little closer to it than most.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December  4, 2006
 
Exactly!  Well said.  My most common question in meetings is What, exactly, does [term] actually mean?  Can you show it to me?
 
posted by antonio
 on December  4, 2006 #
 
They know only the high-level thing, with none of the details. And its the details that make it so interesting  and so powerful.
 
Thats actually pretty insightful. Id thought of this before but never encapsulated that distinction the way you have. Give it a name and itll be more useful :)
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on December  4, 2006 #
 
I fully agree, and this leads me to a question. We already have many people in school well into their 30s, thinking a lot about these layers, building and connecting their understanding from the ground up. And I expect that we wont have fewer abstraction layers in the future; we will have more. What happens when one cannot learn in a single lifetime all of the layers needed to develop, much less answer, the futures important questions? Will specialization doom the most important kinds of understanding?
 
posted by Carl Tashian
 on December  4, 2006 #
 
System administrators tend to focus on the integration of many high-level pieces of software without paying much attention to the underlying implementation details. Does that make them any less smart?
 
posted by Basil Crow
 on December  5, 2006 #
 
My personal view is that one should never use an abstraction until ones understand how an abstraction works.  Once you know how it works, however, feel free to abstract away.
 
Using an abstraction without knowing what it is youre abstracting makes about as much sense to me as using a word without knowing what it means, without having a luciferous logolepsy.
 
posted by Dominik Rabiej
 on December  5, 2006 #
 
Youre on to something here but perhaps shouldnt read too much into the anecdotes.
 
Its not true that mastery of details always precedes names. Lots of things are given working titles before they are well-defined or observed. Thats why so many things have odd/misleading names. For example, imaginary number, subatomic particle, positron, Planet X, or even computer science.
 
But smart folk do seem to be able to explain Big Ideas with concrete analogies. Finding the least & most robust analogy to work with is a large part of problem solving.
 
posted by Aristus
 on December  5, 2006 #
 
Thats brilliant.
 
posted by Ethan Herdrick
 on December  6, 2006 #
 
Its certainly true that many of the smartest people out there think primarily in terms of details, discrete and concrete elements, I dont think one must conclude that there are either fewer smart people who deal primarily in abstraction or that people who deal in detail are necessarily smarter. I think the two ways of thinking suggest a difference in personality, and perhaps a different type of intelligence.
 
I have a question, also, about the latter friends remark. One can be an expert in something without necessarily having spent time thinking about it. Saying that someone has thought about X suggests to me not that the person is an expert or adept, but that their understanding is deep rather than surface, considered rather than facile. Thoughtful. A capable writer may use punctuation with precision, but this does not mean she has thought about punctuation beyond having it drilled into her head at an early age.
 
In a general sense, I dont think that abstraction is the enemy of clarity or intelligence, its just that most people, because they deal primarily in the concrete, are more easily duped by abstraction than detail. Its easier to lie or bulls**t with abstraction.
 
posted by alex
 on December  6, 2006 #
 
Abstraction is a form of data compression: absolutely necessary, because human short-term memory is so small, but the critically important aspect of abstraction is the algorithm that gets you from the name back to the uncompressed details.
 
An uncompressed bitmap is a picture, where every pixel is individually specified; bitmap graphics tend to be very, very large.  A vector graphic is a set of equations, that tell a display program how to draw a picture; vector graphics are typically very small.
 
If someone were to ask, What caused the American Civil War?  I could answer, in a word, slavery and I would be right.  But, if you were to unpack that answer to mean that people opposed to slavery went to war to abolish it, you would be wrong.  Learning the history of the American Civil War is learning to unpack that answer in a way, which is consistent with the historical record.  The actual historical record is vastly too voluminous to comprehend, and that record is only a tiny fractional detritus of the life experiences of literally millions and millions of people.  History is coming up with a narrative analysis that can pack up that huge volume of data in a way that doesnt do obvious violence to what a reasonable person might infer was the substance of actual experience.  When you learn history, you learn a narrative analysis that does that work of compression, that packing up.  So, if you learn the history of the American Civil War, you learn about the anxieties and aggression of the slaveholders, and the controversies occasioned by western expansion, and the dynamics of political struggle and economic development that led the slaveholders to start a war to defend slavery.
 
Excellent post.
 
posted by Bruce Wilder
 on December  6, 2006 #
 
The phrase we used to use was keyword driven.  Managers who didnt have a clue as to the details would master the key words and so sound smart. The problem comes when they then start to agree to do things that the key words imply are easy, but the details say are very hard.
 
posted by Steve Shervais
 on December  7, 2006 #
 
I dont know that all the marketing guys are so stupid.  I used to think that way until I realized that they didnt give a lick about technical knowledge, never did, and probably never will.  What theyre usually concerned with is selling emotionally.  Specifically conditioning a persons hormonal response to put them in an advantageous business situation.
 
I mean, blind luck can only carry you so far in any endeavor.  If its not some sort of skill or capacity that these people we disdain possess, then they would not be in positions of such power.
 
That said, and more on point with the topic of the entry, I believe that the benefit of not using abstractions is being able to see where a problem will occur or where an advantage can be derived from that you cant see when the abstraction strips the texture out of a problem.  Still, abstraction is absolutely, vitally necessary to solving complex problems and to making decisions.
 
Though your friend may think about the throughput of his hard drives platter at the outside of the disk as compared to the inside, I doubt hes considering the electromagnetic forces used to read and write each of the individual bits stored.  Nor would I think hes considering the kinetic forces against the arm that moves the head from the inside to the outside, nor a universe of other things.
 
More so, I doubt he was thinking (deeply, in any case) about the drive heads when he was making the brilliant decision to have Gmail force conversations to be displayed as threads (seriously, if you can thank him about that for me, Id appreciate it).
 
I agree with the general notion though.
 
posted by Danno
 on December 10, 2006 #
 
Its all about the interaction between abstract ideas and details. Being able to work on several levels of abstraction thinking about the same problem is a very useful skill to have.
 
Its easy to obscure the message by hiding it all behind meaningless abstractions but theres a difference between thinking about the information superhighway (totally useless abstraction) and the write_to_file function (useful abstraction) and the individual pieces of the hardware (in most cases useless details). When youre working on an email application, you want to be thinking primarily about inboxes and emails and not individual heads on a hard disk.
 
The interaction between the abstraction and the details, the small and the big picture are almost always the most interesting. For instance, in physics, general relativity describes the mechanics of very large objects, such as stars, planets and galaxies. Quantum mechanics describes the mechanics of the very small, such as subatomic particles. Being to unify those two, the details and the larger picture is the holy grail of physics. Nobodys been able to do it yet.
 
posted by Simen
 on December 10, 2006 #
 
that was brilliant well sayed pure genus i think every thing out before i do it and i devise these plans so that it will work so that you will think im stupid or something and its great can do it without having any probles i will work out all the problems so that there is no longer a problem. i people teenagers kids adults except for a few people they dont face them they would rather run away away from than face it rather than with their probles they go and get drunk and get high so that they dont want to be there and they lay there and that all they their to drunk to even comprehend anything they dont know anything at all and i have so many thoughts that if you were going put all of them on a piece of paper you would fill up a big chest with all of them and you might just think that im kidding but im for real i think so much about every thing even if its just a little thing like figuring out (what i want be) thats easy compared to something like figuring out the skimatics for a building of any size and i make and it works it really works i think that the most intelligent people are the people who keep every thing to themselves. and the reason they do is simply that they know  and to explain it to a person would take well lets just say it like this a very, very long time. let me leave you with this dont undereastimate me. i will never give up ever if i break my leg even though it hurts i still going to get up and do what needs to be done. because i know
 
posted by aaron widman 
 on January  9, 2007 #
 
See also:
 
Guessing the Teachers Password
The Virtue of Narrowness
 
posted by Eliezer Yudkowsky
 on September 23, 2007 #
 
Good points.  The comment about abstractions being akin to data compression was also interesting to read.
 
One thing about abstractions is that theyre (by their abstract definition) not trustworthy.  The reason buzzwords are so hated is mainly because theyre used to justify wildly different things.  Its the lack of specificity that causes engineers to shy away.
 
Its true that humans learn by mastering a specific thing and then giving it a name.  But smart humans also spend a lot of time seeing whether that name can be applied to other things as well (fitting the abstraction to other situations).  Really smart humans spend a lot of time swapping out bits and pieces of what makes up the abstraction (as best they can tell), trying to get an idea of how the bits interact to give the observed result.
 
Thats a pretty good definition of learning ability - the ability to change focus from the abstract to detailed and back.
 
I suspect that a lot of what looks like detail obsession by genius-level folks is in fact one of two other things: (1) Paying attention to things that arent actually details - just smaller abstractions.  (2) Paying attention important details - things that have been found (from experience) to be significant factors in other abstractions.  The kind of small things that, if they changed just a slight bit, would have huge impacts elsewhere.
 
Slight tangent - Warren Buffets annual shareholder letters are some stellar examples of a genius working with many levels of focus.
 
posted by Lloyd Dalton
 on September 23, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December  3, 2006
 
Title: Drop Out
 
I was wondering what I was going to find for todays Sunday Bonus Post. Luckily, at the last minute, the San Francisco Chronicle stepped in to save me:
 
Aaron Swartz dropped out of high school after one year to study on his own. Then he dropped out of college after one year to seek his high-tech fortune. He was still in his teens a year later when he hit the jackpot, selling his startup in October to Wired Digital for an undisclosed but lottery-like payout.
 
With his boyish mien and more geek credentials than engineers twice his age, the suddenly wealthy Swartz belongs to a new generation of young, brainy geeks who began booting up and logging on when their friends were still watching Sesame Street. Before they were old enough to drive, they landed paying gigs. Now that another high-tech boom is heating up Silicon Valley, more of these technologically developed but underage techies are dropping out and starting up.
 
[]
 
Everything that would get you detention at school will get you funding in Silicon Valley, said Paul Saffo, a valley forecaster and essayist who has been exploring technological change and its impact on business and society for more than two decades.
 
[]
 
Fancy new car? I dont know how to drive, Swartz wrote on his blog, Raw Thought. Big house in the suburbs? I like living in small apartments. Expensive clothes? Ive worn a T-shirt and jeans practically every day of my life. Hanging with the cool kids? Im so shy I dont even hang out with the people I know now.
 
(Jessica Guynn, Log on, drop out, cash in: These top techies werent leery about leaving school)
 
Excuse my self-indulgence.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December  3, 2006
 
Dude! haircut!
 
posted by HaircutEyeForTheHairyGuy
 on December  3, 2006 #
 
That looks like he already got a really expensive one, FTHG.
 
posted by judgmentalist
 on December  3, 2006 #
 
Excuse my self-indulgence.
 
Why should we? ;P
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December  3, 2006 #
 
I wonder what chance does a college dropout biotech prodigy have after leaving school and develpong some product. Not much. We are not at the bioDIY age yet.
 
posted by Attila Csordas
 on December  4, 2006 #
 
Unfortunately biotech is not similar to infotech in that startup-dropout respect. You must have some credential, like a university degree, when your product is something with the human body.
 
posted by Attila Csordas
 on December  4, 2006 #
 
Dude! haircut!
 
No, absolutely not! Aarons hair is great and come do think of it  and I say this a non-homosexual male  he looks like a fashion model.
 
I hope that this comment is the most shallow one Ill ever make on this blog :-)
 
posted by FrF
 on December  5, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December  2, 2006
 
Title: Never Back to School
 
When guests came to visit us at Stanford, theyd always comment on the
beauty of our campus  the copious greenery, the modern decorations,
the classic architecture. I used to take them at their word. I always
thought Stanford was a very pretty campus. Now I realize that it was
merely bright.
 
Coming back to Stanford after living in San Francisco is an odd
experience, because the place seems so obviously much more fake. You
dont notice when youre in it, but Stanford is a real wonder of a
bubble. Surrounded by a moat of trees, it pretends to be its own
self-sufficient city, complete with its own name (Stanford, California
is not technically a city, but only a census-designated place; it has
its own zip code, nonetheless). It has its own food, housing, public
transit system, gas station (this is California), police force, job
openings, newspaper, and events calendar. Most large universities have
such things, of course, but they mesh with and supplement the outside
world. At Stanford, despite being in the center of Silicon Valley, youd
hardly know the outside world existed.
 
Everything here is immaculately clean. There is rarely weather, just
constant sun from a cloudless sky (the sky kindly rains only at night so
as not to disturb anyone). There are no outsiders, just scrupulously
examined teachers, carefully selected students, and well-behaved
maintenance staff (who are not paid a living wage, despitee the
proteests of generous-minded students).
 
Coming back to Stanford, wandering its august halls once again, it feels
so strange. I lived here for a full year; this should feel like coming
home. But while I recognize it all  not much changed while I was gone
 it doesnt feel like home at all. Everything seems, well, smaller.
 
Part of that, obviously, is literally true: Im physically bigger now,
so things seem smaller in comparison. But it also feels psychologically
smaller, like after living in San Francisco I can no longer accept this
simulated city as a reality. Instead, Im constantly seeing it in its
context in the wider world.
 
The result is that everything feels like a bizarre show, played out on
this phony stage. Beautiful guys in pajamas, talking to beautiful girls
in less. Party music blaring. Kids scooting elegantly by on bicycles.
Before I just thought this was the strange reality of the world I was
dropped into. Now I see it as just another act.
 
I went to the top of the large tower in the middle of the Stanford
campus, something Id never found the time to do while I was a student.
And looking out, the school splayed before me, I noticed something odd.
The beaultiful Stanford buildings, so varied and complex at ground
level, all look like big red rectangles from the sky. Perhaps Stanford
is one of those things you really have to be in to genuinely see.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December  2, 2006
 
I feel the same way about Berkeley
 
posted by Abhi
 on December  4, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: December  1, 2006
 
Title: Two Conceptions of Taste
 
Taste is difficult to define and even harder to justify, so let us just take it for granted for a moment. (Alright, for those who dont get the picture, heres a quick attempt: taste is the ability to create elegance. The people who made the iPod clearly have taste; the people who made Windows do not.) Unfortunately for me, it seems like a lot of people in the US dont have much taste. (Try watching the infographics on the network evening news, for example.) But even among people who have taste, Ive noticed there are two kinds: positive and negative.
 
Negative taste is the ability to tell when something is bad. Positive taste is the ability to make something that is good. Indeed, one might even say that there is only one kind of taste and positive taste is simply negative taste plus skills. But since taste is generally inferred from creations, its probably simpler to treat them as two different things.
 
People with negative taste can make things that look really nice, but they also look very plain. I think the founders of Google have negative taste. John Gruber, as far as I can tell, mostly does. Same with Paul Graham. (As do I, for that matter.) People with negative taste make things by trying something very simple and then stripping away pieces until it looks good. They can detect goodness, but not create it, so theyre limited to designs with very few variables, because then they can go thru all the options and pick out the ones that look OK.
 
People with positive taste, on the other hand, can make things that genuinely look good. This gives them a lot more freedom in their designs (they can use colors other than white!). Truly good designers have positive taste. Unfortunately for people like us, Apple seems to have hired most of them and put them to work building fairly bland web sites.
 
Of course, taste applies to far more fields than design. One could apply the same idea to writing. Positive taste writers can write beautiful flowing prose that looks you in. Negative taste writers can only write beautiful things by staying simple.
 
People with negative taste can recognize people with positive taste and hire them. People with no taste, on the other hand, fail to see the difference, resulting in disasters like the graphic design department of American Airlines.
 
People with negative taste can also be critics, which brings us to Joe Clarks famous comment Actually, no, it is not the responsibility of the critic to solve the problem. Pauline Kael was not expected to rewrite and redirect the films she disliked.
 
People with negative taste can pick out the bad movies. They just cant make great ones.
 
Followups: John Siracusa, Hypercritical (2009)
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
December  1, 2006
 
Im not a huge fan of analogies but - this being one my favourite light-hearted topics
 
With these kind of ponderings Ive fallen into talking of accelerating and slowing down (as with vehicles). You often have to be able to use both pedals and the way you use them depends on where youre going and what kind of roads youre willing to use.
 
And - of course - European vehicles usually have more than one gear and no cruise control! ;)
 
posted by Tommi
 on December  1, 2006 #
 
By your definitions, I think I have negative taste, but I wonder if what youre calling positive taste isnt just people with negative taste who experiment more. If you rule out enough bad things, what youre left with is very likely to be good, right?
 
That some countries (e.g. Japan) seem to collectively have better taste than others (e.g. America) suggests to me that most people just repeat what theyve experienced, and only a few care enough to strip away whats bad after that (what youre calling negative taste), and fewer still care enough to add more and strip away again (what youre calling positive taste).
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on December  1, 2006 #
 
I think youre talking about taste with varying amounts of creativity.
 
posted by 
 on December  1, 2006 #
 
Positive taste writers can write beautiful flowing prose that looks you in
 
s/looks/locks
 
posted by 
 on December  1, 2006 #
 
You might be oversimplifying things by assuming that negative and positive taste fall on the same axis.  From the way you describe each quality, they sound rather orthogonal.  As you say, people with negative taste can discern the negative as well as the positive qualities of a design.  This sounds independent from your description of positive taste: the ability to create precisely pleasing designs.
 
Perhaps negative taste could itself define the ability to discern the pleasant designs from the poor, and positive taste could define the potential to create such works.  In the same way that a chemist requires accuracy and precision, a great designer requires great amounts of discerning taste and creative taste.
 
posted by BRi
 on December  2, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
I tend to agree with you on this one, but you sure that your explanation of your own negative taste isnt just justification for your recent cynical outlook on SF, Cond Nast, the higher education system in general, American culture, etc. etc.? >:-p
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on December  2, 2006 #
 
BRi,
 
No, they certainly are not orthogonal.  You need negative taste before you can have positive taste.  But to some extent, I think you need a bit of positive taste before you can have negative taste as well.  You need to really think deeply about a subject to come to a good enough understanding to criticize it well, and by far the easiest way to come to such and understanding is through your own practice.
 
Additionally, taste is definitely like a deeply branching tree.  Even within a genre, there are many different styles, which appeal to different tastes differently.  These tastes can be refined in different ways, and, for instance, some art is only appealing when very closely scrutinized, with a deep understanding of the artists motivations, while other art is pleasing to the unpracticed eye.  Both require just as much care on the part of the artist to execute, but consideration of audience is a key part of such positive taste.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on December  2, 2006 #
 
Oh, my Lord.  Why did you incite me to look at American Airlines web site?
 
Re: Reynen: I wonder if what youre calling positive taste isnt just people with negative taste who experiment more. If you rule out enough bad things, what youre left with is very likely to be good, right?
 
Yes  thats the whole idea of natural selection. But you have to try a lot of things! The search space is too vast without some kind of heuristic pruning.
 
Aaron: Any ideas for cultivating positive taste?
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December  2, 2006 #
 
Paul Graham has more than negative taste:
 
http://paulgraham.com/sl.html
 
Great post, though.
 
posted by Anon
 on December  3, 2006 #
 
Aaron: Any ideas for cultivating positive taste?
 
As usual, there are a couple decent books with some general rules (Williamss The Non-Designers Design Book isnt bad) but mostly I think its just practice.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December  5, 2006 #
 
That some countries (e.g. Japan) seem to collectively have better taste than others (e.g. America) suggests to me that most people just repeat what theyve experienced, and only a few care enough to strip away whats bad after that
 
I dont think thats it; because design is necessarily unrepetetive
(otherwise designers start screaming about theft).
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on December  5, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 29, 2006
 
Title: Lazy Backup
 
If theres one thing good UI designers know, its that the best UI is not to have one at all. Applications should just save, security should just work, and computers should just backup.
 
Apparently that last task is a harder than it appears, since I still havent found decent backup software for Unix (OS X and GNU/Linux).
 
Here is how the software should work:
 
I install it.
 
I point it at some storage server (ideally Amazon EC2 and S3, but if thats too hard then a GNU/Linux server with a large drive).
 
I give it a maximum space limit (e.g. store no more than 200GB).
 
I give it a maximum up-bandwidth limit (e.g. use no more than 5K/s).
 
I tell it to run.
 
From then on, it should just work. In the background, it will upload my files to the server using only 5K/s of bandwidth. If I get disconnected from the Internet or reboot my computer, when I get back on it will pick up where it left off. If a file changes it will only send the diff and store that as well. When I run out of disk space it will delete the old diffs.
 
It will preserve all the Unix ACLs and permissions and weird Mac OS X resource forks and stuff so that if my drive ever dies I can make a full bootable restore from the backup.
 
Does this software exist?
 
The closest Ive seen is rdiff-backup, which is very nice but fails to automate some key steps.
 
If it doesnt exist, let me know if youre interested in writing it (a wrapper around rdiff-backup to do it shouldnt be too hard, I would think). Id be willing to offer a bounty.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 29, 2006
 
I like Deja Vu (which comes bundled with Toast). I just schedule daily backups to my server and forget about it. Its completely faceless and just backs up my home folder without bothering me as long as I have my server volume mounted (which I always do anyway).
 
posted by Mike Cohen
 on November 29, 2006 #
 
rsync can do pretty much everything you ask for (although Im not sure if it can handle the MacOS stuff unless its stored in a regular file).  I have a setup where everything you mention is in place except for the bandwidth and disk space limitations (okay, it uses rsync over ssh and cron to schedule the jobs).  rsync does support a bandwidth limit option, and with du, another cron job can go through and clear out old backups.
 
posted by Sean Conner
 on November 29, 2006 #
 
http://www.jungledisk.com/ is an easy way to use Amazon S3.  I currently run a shell script to rsync to an external hd for backup, but you are right, there is no good solution.  Maybe the Time Machine feature in the next mac os release will help.
 
posted by Keizo Gates
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Would you please make another blog post if you find the solution to this problem or, as you propose, it finds you?
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Duplicity isnt quite what you want, Aaron, but it is closer than anything else Ive seen in the Linux space.
 
posted by Luis Villa
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Are you looking for something that will upload your files as you save them, or using a nightly cron or similar?  It would be really nice if it could detect when files were modified, instead of having to scan your entire filesystem for changes (which purportedly Time Machine will be able to do, but it looks limited in other ways).
 
On my last machine, I used rsnapshot. It makes incremental backups, and handles scheduling for you, which is nice. Also, you dont need any special tools to restore the backups.
 
But I have just switched to a macbook. As it happens, my new backup drives arrived in the mail this very afternoon. I think Ill give rdiff-backup a try.
 
Anyways, Im pretty interested in your bounty. I wonder if I can find the time. Itd be great if you provided more details about what exactly you wanted.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
You may wish to consider pull backups  where the backup server periodically connects to the source and downloads the data for backup, rather than the client explicitly uploading.
 
Otherwise, if the client has read/write access to the backup medium, an attacker, worm or user/software error on your machine would be able to damage or tamper with your backups.
 
The ideal solution that Ive been thinking about is a backup appliance  a simple unattended machine that will periodically connect to my primary data store(s) and take an incremental snapshot, ideally via rsync-over-SSH.
 
It shouldnt be too hard  Linksys NSLU2 devices already seem to provide most of my desired functionality, with configuration via HTTP and support for backing up SMB shares.  (Theyre embedded Linux machines, and can be reinstalled with more general-purpose firmware, eg from http://www.nslu2-linux.org/)
 
Multiple backup appliance instances could be deployed (in different physical locations) for added redundancy.
 
In the case of a laptop as the source, one issue would be host discovery and connectivity - if the laptop is on a non-routable IP address or inbound port 22 connections arent available (which is common), then the backup appliances may have problems connecting.  Some kind of backwards SSH tunnelling would probably solve this problem.
 
Similarly, bandwidth on the client may vary  some mechanism to moderate the bandwidth used by the backup appliances from the client-side would be desirable.
 
But I havent built it yet.
 
posted by David McBride
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Brackup - http://brad.livejournal.com/tag/brackup. To limit bandwidth, use trickle.
 
posted by James
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Ive been using rsyncbackup (http://rsyncbackup.erlang.no/) for about 2 years on a mac.
 
It will work over a network (since its rsync under the hood).
 
I personaly use it on a local volume since it can handle incremental backups quite well using hard links.
 
As for the space limit problem, there is no good solution, but you always can delete older backups in a cron job.
 
posted by Colin
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
You MUST, AND I MEAN MUST use incremental backups. Having just one copy is completely useless as a corrupted file is gone forever. Likewise for an accidentally deleted one, when you discover the problem after a backup.
 
Use a linux based solution that can do it via hard-links. This means you can cd into each directory and see a copy of the full set, without  it taking up lots of space for the same data. For this reason I have been using RIBS (RSync Incremental Backups) for several years now. I have a copy of my home directory available going back three years or so.
 
It doesnt have a GUI, but you do need to edit the script to set the directory to backup, and the host to SSH to in order to do the backup. Not complicated. Oh, and you need to set up cron to perform backups.
 
It will pickup from where it left off if disturbed, and it will also only transfer over the changes. I use it to backup a 120gig primary storage area every single night, consisting of files averaging from a few kilobytes up to several hundred meg.
 
posted by Fraser
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
A general purpose bandwidth limiter would make an interesting general application / utility.  So many apps need network connectivity, Im imagining a tool that would let me define up/down limits for specific applications and forget about it.  At home were on dialup and winXP, being able to limit everything but firefox (i.e. keep all the auto update checkers from getting in the way) would be huge.
 
Reading the trickle paper makes it sound like a general solution would be non-trivial.  It may be easier to make something like a modified firewall and send the backup out over a specific port every time.
 
Im interested to hear what you come up with.
 
posted by AdamB
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Rsnapshot - http://www.rsnapshot.org.
 
Ive been using it for 3+ years without a problem, backing up multiple colocated servers to a dedicated machine here at the house with lots of cheap disk.
 
posted by Bill Bradford
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Ive been using unison (http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~bcpierce/unison/) for a couple years with no problems.  It runs on Windows, Linux and OS X.
 
The great thing about it is that it does masterless replication, so I can create files on any machine and the rest of the machines eventually get them. Of course, thats the downside, since you cant really just let it run and forget about it since you have to manually deal with merge conflicts (pretty rare in practice). You might be able to set up a cron job and have it skip conflicts, I havent tried that.
 
posted by Christian R. Simms
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Ive been trying to work out a way to get svn to do this.
 
The idea is to run a cron job to periodically check in the entire drive.
 
Svn marks changed files on the fly so it wouldnt have to scan the drive.
 
Im sure some linux genius could work out how to throttle down the connection that the job runs in.
 
Joe
 
posted by Joe Harris
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
You MUST, AND I MEAN MUST use incremental backups.
 
I agree with Fraser on this point, but I believe Dirvish to be a much better solution than RIBS:
 
http://www.dirvish.org/
 
posted by John Quigley
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
libsloth http://ftp.die.net/pub/libsloth/libsloth.c is a crude but effective bandwidth limiter.
 
How to use:
 
env LD_PRELOAD=/path/to/libsloth.so BYTES_PER_SECOND=1000 command arg1 arg2  argN
 
Here command is a dynamically linked, non-threaded TCP client or server that you wish to rate-limit.
 
libsloth actually separately rate limits all read()s and write()s to each file descriptor regardless of whether its a network socket or not.
 
posted by Josh Purinton
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
If youre looking for a linux appliance, might I recommend Buffalo Technologys Linkstation Pro? Its faster by far than the Linksys you mention, and I believe its cheaper too. And Buffalos tech support is absolutely unbeatable. The Linkstation has a very active hacking community.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Check http://www.carbonite.com - pretty much does exactly that.
 
posted by 
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
heh, except you said UNIX. Well, they have it for windows at least.
 
posted by 
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Not linux compatible, but Windows and Mac.
 
http://www.seagate.com/products/retail/mirra/index.html
 
I havent tried this but it allegedly backs up as you save.
 
posted by rick
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
It depends on how much you care about OS X metadata. As far as I know
 
http://www.shirt-pocket.com/SuperDuper/SuperDuperDescription.html
 
is the only backup tool for OS X that does what you want and also keeps all metadata intact.
 
It creates a .dmg file on a mounted network drive and backs up to the .dmg file.
 
Im unaware of any cross platform backup tool that will backup OS X files 100% correctly.
 
posted by david mathers
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Its a commercial app in beta, but this app is a set and forget app that only copies the changed bytes (similar to Rsync) and encrypts the data on your machine before uploading it.  I have an interested in this, so I am certainly not impartial:
 
www.vionobackup.com
 
On another note though, I have used Rsync for a long time on the Mac. Its a great tool. My only issue was that my data was not encrypted at the server end, so thats why we decided to write our own. Its only in beta and available for Mac and Windows, so appreciate any feedback
 
posted by Ade
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
I second rsnapshot (http://www.rsnapshot.org/)
 
posted by daniel
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Try looking at ZFS:
 
http://www.opensolaris.org/os/community/zfs/
 
ZFS backup and restore are powered by snapshots. Any snapshot can generate a full backup, and any pair of snapshots can generate an incremental backup. Incremental backups are so efficient that they can be used for remote replication  e.g. to transmit an incremental update every 10 seconds.
 
Snapshots are just one of many nice features ZFS offers.  That said, itd take some serious work to get it working on your Mac, assuming its possible at all.
 
However, you may just have to wait a while, as it might appear in Apples next OS release:
 
http://www.oreillynet.com/onlamp/blog/2006/08/proof_that_os_x_leopard_will_u.html
 
posted by Nick
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
I use backupninja, which sounds may be just the light user-friendliness on top of rdiff-backup youd like.
 
posted by Andy
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Boo for using _ for italics
 
Orielly Link
 
posted by Nick
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
+1 for rsnapshot. One additional thing I didnt see mentioned is that Mac OS Xs default rsync binary  (which would be doing the gruntwork for rsnapshot) takes a -E flag to properly capture resource forks and other extended attributes of HFS.
 
posted by Cody Raspen
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
Its commercial software, but Storage Exec from Veritas/Symantec does file level replication between a source and target share/file system.  It can throttle CPU and bandwidth utilization.
 
BackupExec with Continuouse Data Protection has a similar functionality, with an agent.
 
Your data is most important, but the ability to perform a fast, reliable recovery of a system is critical for business use.  For this purpose, I bought Acronis when my daughter went to college with her laptop.  It creates a boot CD (linux based) that allows network and USB connections to restore an image to the machine.  Backup rates are ~1 Gig/min for USB 2.  Restores are a bit longer, but they are 100% reliable.
 
Echoing a theme from previous posts, Acronis supports an incremental backup feature and you can schedule using the Acronis scheduler.
 
posted by Paul Begley
 on November 30, 2006 #
 
Try Bacula.  I am using it to back up several Linux and Windows servers on our LAN and its perfect.  It does everything you are asking for and more.  I pretty much forget about it until I rm -rf * in the wrong directory, and then it restores it easy as can be.  It has a director on one (Linux) machine and you schedule it to connect to the other machines and do incremental backups onto another storage machine or backup device.  It is very flexible and reliable.
 
posted by Paul Viren
 on December  1, 2006 #
 
Another thing thats tricky about setting up backups is getting the includes and excludes just right. Dont want to leave anything out (Ive done it; obscure non-home-dir file that I really needed), but dont want to waste space on, say, iMovies included themes.
 
It would be great if somebody published a ready-made black/whitelist for Mac OS X, or maybe even a script that examined your system and wrote one.
 
posted by David M.
 on December  1, 2006 #
 
Christian R. Simms,
 
I had the idea  to use svn to do incremental backups to, but I hit some walls pretty fast.
 
1 - its quite slow with binaries
2 - you will have big time fun with permissions
3 - svn puts a .svn folder in every folders
 
except  for those 3 points, it could make a decent backup system.
 
my 2
 
posted by h3
 on December  1, 2006 #
 
Update: rdiff-backup (1) has no pretend mode, (2) is ludicrously slow on small files, and the real showstopper, (3) doesnt work over mounted network volumes  but doesnt tell you that until its finished its backup, only to leave it in an inconsistent and unusable state after all those hours.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December  2, 2006 #
 
Ive used Amanda (http://www.amanda.org/) with sucesss, it uses (as much as possible) the clients command line tools, there is no GUI but it gives you nightly email reports if you want. Stages backups to a local hard drive before comiting them, so there is some automatic fall-back in case your backup device isnt there.
 
I havent used it to backup to hard drives, but it does seem to understand bandwith, backup windows, priority by machine and by partition, etc.
 
I dont know if it does everything you want, but I have similar feelings about software and it works for me.
 
posted by David Rouse
 on December  3, 2006 #
 
So this is what Ive come up with: rdiff-backup, besides being a shady and un-feel-good program, doesnt handle lots of small files, at all. So Im making a disk image with superduper, and then incrementing the image with rdiff-backup. Well see how it goes. Superduper is super-slow, and also shareware, so itd be cool if somebody knew of a similar program that works better or is free. Its a front-end for ditto(1) from what I understand.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on December 10, 2006 #
 
try backupninja and ninjahelper
http://dev.riseup.net/backupninja/
 
posted by jp
 on December 15, 2006 #
 
Im surprised nobody has mentioned backuppc (http://backuppc.sourceforge.net). It pulls backups down through the network, does incremental backups, and even pools files across PCs, so that only one copy of any given file is stored in the backup. I have it backing up 9 Linux boxes right now, 434 GB of backups being stored on a 120GB RAID 1 array, with 14 GB available
 
Nice web interface for restoring backups, automatic notification mails if its unable to do a backup for an extended period of time, only backs up machines after work hours if theyre constantly onlinebut if theyre not, will pick up where it left off as soon as it sees a machine that has been offline
 
It copies using Rsync or Samba, so itll backup Windows, too, if you need it to I have it running on a 10 year old dual 500MHz server that cant really be used for anything else
 
Havent figured out how to cap its size/bandwidth, but I find it incredibly easy to (not) use, and have even used it to restore files for clients with a few clicks
 
Cheers,
John
 
posted by John Locke
 on January  1, 2007 #
 
CrashPlan might come close to what youre looking for (Mac OS X). You point it to a server, give it an amount of bandwidth to use, and tell it to go, and it backs up most recent changes first and then the rest of your stuff. When files change, it does a diff and only backs up the bytes that have changed, since bandwidth is a bottleneck. Heres a review at TidBITS:
 
http://www.tidbits.com/tb-issues/TidBITS-868.html#10
 
posted by Scott Teresi
 on February 28, 2007 #
 
CrashPlan isnt just for Mac OS X it runs on Linux and Windows also (actually, Linux is coming soon)
 
posted by 
 on February 28, 2007 #
 
Im currently looking into backup programs as I want to backup a Mac and a Windows laptop to an NSLU2 running Debian Linux.
 
Boxbackup sounds like it does what you want (although Im not sure about the bandwidth limiting). It claims to support Mac OS resource forks, although Ive not tried this yet. A <a href=http://blog.plasticsfuture.org/2006/04/23/mac-backup-software-harmful/>blog post on Mac backups
 
rdiff-backup was horribly slow for me: it took about an hour for an incremental backup to decide to do more or less nothing. Im not sure whether thats because the NSLU2 is slow and the comparisons are being done on the server side, or what. Im going to look into Bacula and Boxbackup when I get a moment. Bacula isnt the sort of lazy backup you talk of, but seems to be well maintained and used by serious sysadmins, so Im inclined to trust it over the various rsync based scripts which are out there.
 
posted by Paul Wright
 on February 28, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 28, 2006
 
Title: A Trip to the Courthouse: Part 2
 
continued from part 1
 
For a hundred and eighty-six years America had an opt-in system of copyright, Lessig began. Copyright was not granted automatically but was limited to works that were published. And then only to those with notice. And then only to those published with notice that were deposited and registered promptly. And to those [published,] marked, deposited, and registered, the copyright still had to be renewed after 28 years. Under this system, nearly fifty percent of published work entered the public domain immediately and ninety-three percent within twenty-eight years.
 
Following the 1976 Copyright Act, that all changed and copyright was granted automatically, for a full term, as soon as a work was fixed in a tangible form. No longer was it necessary to published, deposit, mark, or renew. Copyright moved from an opt-in system to an opt-out. And under this system, zero percent of published work will enter the public domain for at least a hundred years.
 
This is a radical change  perhaps the most radical change  to copyright law, going from ninety-three percent of works going in the public domain to zero. And the result is a huge increase in orphaned works  works whose copyright holder cannot even be located to ask permission.
 
In Eldred v. Ashcroft, the Supreme Court ruled that copyright only needed judicial review when the traditional contours of copyright law were changed. This is clearly a change to copyrights traditional contours and thus deserves a chance for judicial review.
 
The governments lawyer  slick, but not as slick as Lessig  argued that the Court was referring to only two traditional contours: the right to fair use (which allows things like the use of small snippets of copyrighted material and limited copies for educational use) and the idea/expression dichotomy (which says that you cant copyright ideas but only a particular way of expressing them).
 
Lessig responded that this was absurd. If the government ruled that cartoons featuring the prophet Mohammed could not receive copyrights, the law would clearly be subject to First Amendment review, even though neither fair use nor idea/expression were touched. Similarly, the change from opt-out to opt-in deserves review.
 
There were three judges, as required by law to hear all federal appeals. The one on the right, who was live via satellite, didnt say a word the entire time. The one on the left didnt ask more than a question or two. The judge in the middle was responsible for most of the questions. And she did not appear to get it.
 
How is this different from Eldred? she asked.
 
A quarter of the way in to the argument, she handed a slip of paper to her aide. Her aide scurried away and came back with a thick document. She looked down at it and then looked up.
 
You were the lawyer in Eldred as well, she asked Lessig.
 
Yes, your honor.
 
How is this different from Eldred?
 
In Eldred, Lessig explained, trying again, the issue was whether Congress could continue expanding the length of copyright in order to keep Mickey Mouse from going into the public domain. The Court  Justice Ginsburg channelling Justice Scalia  said that since Congress had been doing this forever they could keep doing it. But in this case, were talking about a new change, one that effects orphaned works  works for who the copyright holder cannot be located.
 
Which wouldnt include Mickey Mouse, because every can find Disney? the judge asked.
 
Precisely, Lessig replied.
 
During the governments rebuttal, the judge asked who was lobbying against this change in copyright law. Well, the governments lawyer replied, um, I suspect it was people very much like the ones you see here today. (Yeah, Lessig scoffed later, I was testifying in Congress against the bill back when I was fifteen!)
 
By the same token, the judge asked Lessig about what solutions to the problem he would expect were the law ruled unconstitutional. There are many possible solutions, Lessig replied, drawing a picture of a network of people fighting this issue in all branches of government. There was this lawsuit, of course, but there was also a bill introduced by local Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren to require a one-dollar renewal fee (based, Lessig did not say, on a New York Times op-ed he had written), there was a series of hearings by the U.S. Copyright Office on the orphaned works problem, which concluded The orphan works problem is real.  Legislation is necessary to provide a meaningful solution to the orphan works problem as we know it today. and provided several proposals.
 
Your time is up, the judge said, before the red light saying his time was up had gone on, and Lessig quietly packed up his papers and filed out, half the courtroom following behind him.
 
Congratulations, Internet Archive founder Brewster Kahle (the man who Lessig is filing this lawsuit on behalf of) said to Lessig, shaking his hand and smiling broadly. Lessig smiled back, then posed politely for photos with Kahle and his associate Rick Prelinger. The well-wishers soon streamed out until it was just Lessig and his fellow law school lawyers. The smile disappeared from Lessigs face. They didnt get it, Lessig said downcast.
 
Oh, I think they were getting it towards the end there, one of the lawyers said, trying to cheer Lessig up. No, he replied, they werent. Well, another lawyer chimed in, to write an opinion theyll have to read the briefs and then theyll see your argument. No, he explained, they can just tell a clerk which way to write the opinion and have them do it.
 
Actually, our best hope now is that they wont write an opinion at all and then Golan [a related case in a different Circuit] will go the other way and then well have a circuit split. (A circuit split is when two different circuit courts rule different ways on the same issue. Usually the Supreme Court then has to step in to resolve the disagreement.)
 
Well, at least your case didnt have any flamethrowers, someone said, trying to lighten the mood. But Lessig just wasnt in the mood.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 28, 2006
 
Lessig is such a head case.
 
posted by Ben Donley
 on November 28, 2006 #
 
Its always disappointing to get to the very top, and realize that yes, Things Really Do Work That Way.
 
No, the guys at the top arent any wiser or braver or more prudent than the average schmoe, with a very few exceptions.
 
posted by chad
 on November 28, 2006 #
 
I am amazed at the level of misunderstanding/lack of interest at the US Court of Appeals level.  You would think that judges of this nature, when their job is to prepare for oral arguments and to have their questions answered, would be able to properly prepare for such a case.  I mean they have the whole time to simply ask him questions about what hes getting at and why the case should be decided in his favor.
 
Im sure he knew they didnt get it two minutes into his argument when they werent asking him questions.
 
posted by Michael
 on November 29, 2006 #
 
Someone told me: all you have is ideals and principles; they have all the money in the world. When was the last time ideals won?
 
http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/000859
 
:-(
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on November 29, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 27, 2006
 
Title: A Trip to the Courthouse: Part 1
 
The United State Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit is a federal-looking building nestled in among the offices and shops and business parks of San Franciscos downtown. Large marble walls and staircases try desperately to send the message that what goes on here is of paramount importance, that the decisions made in these halls will reverberate throughout a large part of the country: Alaska, Arizona, California, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington  the largest of any appeals court.
 
But, this morning, the courtroom tells a different story. With people packed like Sardines into a room not much bigger than a bedroom in a San Francisco apartment, with one of the judges missing and replaced  without explanation  with a large television, and with hesitant, stammering public defenders arguing their cases against only slightly-less-hesitant civil servants, I briefly wondered if I was in the wrong room.
 
The first case I saw appeared to be a man requesting asylum in the US from his home country. I missed large portions of the case, but as I paid attention, the facts started coming out. He wanted asylum from persecution because he was gay. But the country he was hiding from didnt exactly have a record of persecution of gays. And the only evidence of persecution he could point to was that a couple people on the street once called him gay.
 
The next case seemed a little better for the non-government guy. It was about a man who accused of defrauding Medicare by double-billing. He noted that the Court had changed the law during the case; instead of just requiring the jury to find whether double-billing had occurred, it now required the jury to find how much. But theyd made that change after the trial, so hed never had a chance to present any evidence on how much double-billing had occurred. His lawyer asked for a chance to hold a hearing to present the evidence.
 
Do you have the evidence? a judge asked. The lawyer responded that he didnt, because he was a public defender and needed to hire a professional accountant to look through the math, but couldnt afford to without a judges permission, and the judge denied his request at the same time he denied the hearing on the subject. But, he explained, the governments accountant had admitted on the stand that there were mistakes in the math he presented, although he didnt know what impact they had. Couldnt he just get a trial to assess the math? The judges didnt seem to think so.
 
If the judges werent going to give a victory on that case, they really werent on the next one. A man who lived with his mom in Massachusetts was challenging the governments search of his storage locker in Arizona. His lawyer sparred with the judges for some time about the details of Fourth Amendment law. Then the governments lawyer took the stage. Let me tell you about this man, he said. As a condition of his parole, he wasnt permitted to have any guns. But he kept one gun, the machine gun hed had since he was a kid  he called it his baby. The government got a tip and showed up on his doorstep and he practically handed them the gun and then told them to go away. It was raining outside and he wouldnt let them into his house. They searched the house and found another machine gun kit.
 
In Court, he was asked if he had any more guns. His lawyer, acting on his clients behalf, insisted that the Court didnt have jurisdiction because all the other guns were in a storage locker in Arizona. After the lawyer said that, we had to search the locker in Arizona. There we found a huge shipping crate. To take the crate into evidence, the government had to inventory it. There we found 44 flamethrowers, 22 submachine guns, 5 hand grenades, and a handful of pistols. We had to call in the bomb squad and check over everything. And hes arguing that the Fourth Amendment doesnt permit us to open that crate.
 
Later, I heard some of the lawyers on a different case joking. Once opposing counsel says flamethrowers, youve lost. Doesnt matter how good your case is. Youre never going to recover from that.
 
It was into this environment that Larry Lessig stepped. Lessig has been thinking about the implications of copyright law for most of his career. He has spent months practicing to argue before the Supreme Court and other lesser courts. He spent the weekend practicing this case with other faculty members at the Stanford Law School. He spent the morning pacing the halls, going over his notes one last time. And as he strode into the Courtroom that morning and begun his argument before the Court, unlike every other lawyer who had presented, he didnt stumble over a single word.
 
In some ways, this should have been home territory for Lessig. It was his own Court, right in his own town of San Francisco. And as he paced the halls, he was continually interrupted by former students of his at Stanford Law, who had gone on to careers as lawyers in the area, which had brought them here, to argue before the Court just like him. And, perhaps he figured, the judges would welcome a break from the endless parade of petty complaints to his arguments about the big issues  the First Amendment, the Progress clause, copyright. Werent things like that why they became judges in the first place?
 
Perhaps not.
 
continued in part 2
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 27, 2006
 
OH my god that is so classic - flame throwers!!
 
posted by kitsune
 on December  1, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 27, 2006
 
Title: Why It Makes Sense to Bite the Hand that Feeds You
 
Errol Morris:
 
Preventive bite. Hand is bound to betray you eventually. Get it before it gets you. Remember, every hand is capable of naked aggression.
 
Preemptive bite. Hand is ready to do something. Just look at it. Youve got to protect yourself, dont you?
 
Keeps gums healthy.
 
Hand less likely poisoned than food.
 
Tastes good.
 
Why not?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 27, 2006
 
also, if the hand continues to feed you even after you have bit it, you can feel a little better about the hand.
 
posted by manuelg
 on November 27, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  5, 2006
 
Title: Pay it Forward
 
A year or two ago, I suffered from a devastating server crash. The little heads that read data off the hard drive crashed into the driv itself, and as we rebooted the computer, trying to get it working again, they scratched the hard drive so badly that when we sent it to try to get it repaired we learned  they had scraped the drive straight through.
 
My site was dead, my backups werent working, an entire year of my work had been lost and I was devastated. A bunch of generous souls chipped in an amazing $4000 to my server fund to try to bring things back.
 
Now that Im back on my feet, Id like tor eturn the favor by donating $4000 to websites in trouble. (Indeed, Ive been planning this for a while and have already donated some to sites when I heard they were having fundraising drives.) 
So heres this weeks Sunday Bonus Post: suggest a site that deserves a donation. Here are the rules:
 
The site must publish content or provide a service on the Internet.
 
The site must have a donate button or some other explicit request for donations.
 
You must genuinely like the site.
 
If you want to nominate a site that meets these criteria, post it here in a comment. Ill try to make most of the donations by next week.
 
Thanksgiving update: PayPal locked out my account for security reasons so its taken me a while to get to this, but Thanksgiving Day seems like as appropriate a time as any.
 
Recipients:
 
Im still looking for more recipients, so feel free to suggest some.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  5, 2006
 
http://www.jackslocum.com/yui/ - Excellent articles on Jack Slocums YAHOO.ext: an amazing extension library for the YUI library.
 
posted by mic_pre
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
Great initiative.  I nominate MediaLens.  They do a terrific job with very few resources, and will, I am sure, make a good use of whatever sum you can give them.  They accept donations by cheque, sanding order, or paypal.
 
posted by Pablo Stafforini
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
I suggest to create Backup Awareness Program, instead. ;)
 
posted by 
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
I nominate StevePavlina.com.  A fantastic site dedicated to enabling individuals to better themselves.
 
posted by Chris
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
I nominate the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, a great and huge reference work on philosophy written by many researchers and volunteers, providing a widely-used source base for academic work worldwide. They receive donations by check or credit card. Great initiative! Congratulations!
 
posted by Helder Ribeiro
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
I nominate the Full Belly Project. 
They want to give Peanut Sheller machines to hungry people. These Peanut Shellers are simple hand-operated machines, low cost and made of concrete. These machines will make it easier for people to feed themselves. The design is public domain. They need help to spread the word.
 
posted by Serenity77
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
I nominate WorldChanging
an amazing and inspirational site for people trying to change the world.
 
posted by Nathan 
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
I would suggest the Internet Archive!  Heres the donate page!  What a wonderful idea and Im glad youre looking to do good with your bounty.
 
posted by Beatrice Murch
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
I cant believe nobodys mentioned this: Wikipedia, of course!
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
Id like to return the favor
 
So, I think you mean pay it back.
 
posted by Ethan
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
I agree with the idea. But I think you can do most or more by making backup.reddit (where people talk about backup issues - history and solutions) - subreddit site, so that now this widespread PC and digital equipment use among not that informed or ready populations all over the planet gets some - reasonable helps and guides.
 
That subreddit can have a policy of (comfortably) accepting peoples own writings and ideas about backup (and may be some security) issues. It can encompass issues like Why we still cant disable Dont save button? for some sloppy people or with disabilities. OLPC would have backup solutions for those kids personal unique data? How Amazon S3s backup potential can be a start of real infra for off-premise backups for personal computation, finally?. etc.
 
Thatd have some lasting effect and results.
 
posted by backup.reddit
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
You may want to consider increasing your donation by  50% or 100%.  Thus creating a sort of Ponzi scheme for donations should the people you donate to decide to repay it similarly.
 
Buckminster Fuller theorized that a lot of scarcity problems could be solved if you gave people metalworking tools with the condition that they make two sets of tools and give them away with the same conditions.
 
posted by Peter Boothe
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
Id recommend the Community Colo project, at http://www.communitycolo.net/ . They allow any non-profit to have free web space, or a web server, or to co-locate their own box. They need money to keep the (virtual) doors open. See http://cccp.pbwiki.com/ for details.
 
posted by Michael Clark
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
I seem to recall youve done some work with MusicBrainz in the past  Theyre a thoroughly worthwhile place to drop some cash, building up a glorious free music metadata database that will one day help us crush the evil gracenote.
 
posted by Rod Begbie
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
Id like to nominate Kitchen Democracy (http://www.kitchendemocracy.org/donate)  trying to use the internet to make it easier for people to get involved in local politics.
 
Second choice would be mobile active http://mobileactive.org/, folks trying to faciliatate the use of cellphones for political activism.
 
WorldChanging nominated above is a great site as well, but I dont think they need the money as much as the two I mentioned.
 
Great idea. Robert Heinlen would approve. A nice thing you are doing, Aaron.
 
posted by Tim
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
Demonoid.com.
 
Its the best torrent site ever. I download almost every book there to check out if its worth buying in deadtree format, not to mention having a softcopy to search through helps. They also have tv shows (old obscure ones and new ones) et al.I am unsure what you stand on that is
 
They do have a donate page (www.demonoid.com/donate.php)but it seems you have to be registered to donate so Ill send you an invite when they open again or if you want I can email you my username and password temporarily.
 
In the interest of full disclosure, a donation from my account would cause me to have my ratio autocomplete to 1. As it is, my ratio stands at 0.96 right now and I strive to keep it at 1 by not leeching.
 
The donor status lasts 30 days.
 
posted by heuristix
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
I recommend The New Standard, an independent hard news site which has been struggling for attention and funds. They dont accept advertising of any sort. They almost went under this fall, but just squeaked through on their fundraising drive. Noam Chomsky once offered to triple anyones donation.
 
Theyre a serious outfit doing the type of news that many of us on the left consider important, while still setting a standard for reporting that even corporate news sites should aspire to. They report mostly on topics that corporate media would never touch. Ive been a fan since they began running reports from the ground in Iraq from the excellent correspondent, Dahr Jamail, at the start of the war when virtually all journalists were embedded within the military or otherwise confined to safe areas. I also enjoy their coverage of worker rights issues and the environment. For those of us who hope for a world with more reputable, independent media organizations, this looks to be one of the best sites to root for.
 
posted by Scott Teresi
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
OpenStreetMap.
 
posted by Christopher Schmidt
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
Have Money Will Vlog is an excellent site that helps videobloggers get excellent ideas off the ground, funding them to put their dreams on film.  Check it out and tell them kitty sent you.
 
posted by Susan
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
I nominate braintalk which is a forum for people with neurological disorders.  They have had some drive issues recently too.
 
posted by Oliver Day
 on November  7, 2006 #
 
Hey Aaron, 
I think I might have found someone that I believe should get some help with his website. CJNepal.org (http://cjnepal.org) is a Nepal citizen journalism website. We still believe that every citizen has the right to speak up their mind and participate to inform the society. Thats what it is all about. Trying to get rid of the censorship which is common in Nepal. Prameya, the site owner, is a friend of mine, and has a dream he really wants to accomplish; to have his website noticed all over Nepal. He started his project when he was still living in Nepal, which was called Merosansar. After he received a death threat from the king of Nepal (Yes, really! Hes a dictator, you might have heard about revolts in Nepal on the news not that long ago), he was forced to close his site and moved to New York with his family where hes now a student at Syracuse University. So, a few months ago, he started his site again under a new name, CJNepal. Also, Prameya needs to pay for his server, for advertising, hiring Nepali people whod like to write articles for the site, etc. No wonder hes currently in debt, so any money would really help him out I guess. If you would ever feel like donating to CJNepal, you can find a donate button on the About page here: http://cjnepal.org/node/78
Also, would you mind including my name (Laurent) on the additional Note form when donating (if you ever would), just because Id like to thank him for all the things he has done for me.
 
posted by Laurent Van Winckel
 on November  8, 2006 #
 
Hey Aaron
You might consider donating to townvibes! , they are a local community website and they want to do communities a lot of good and bring together all information about all communities
 
I heart townvibes
 
http://beta.townvibes.com
 
Richard
 
posted by Richard Kai
 on November  8, 2006 #
 
http://www.antiwar.com
 
posted by omar
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Hello Aaron,
I would like to nominate to you Modest Needs at http://www.modestneeds.org - for your plan to pay it forward the help you received. Modest Needs is a non-profit organization who helps people with a one time need such as a mother whose husband has left her with all the bills and her electricity is about to be turned off; or someone who was affected by Hurricane Katrina and needs money to buy more lumber or other supplies to help re-build their home. You can browse the applications the site receives from people asking for help and see the struggles each person is facing and requesting a little help. Modest Needs has been helping people for over 5 years, I believe, with modest requests. The President of Modest Needs who began the program with his own money will be on the Today Show Saturday Morning, November 18, 2006 talking about how the program works. Donors from all over the world give contributions, either every month or on a one-time basis. These funds are then used to give away to the neediest of people applying. They do thorough checks to verify all information submitted to them by the people requesting help through their site, and it has been heartwarming for me to be a donor with this organization. Most donations, like mine of usually $30 per month, doesnt make a huge difference, but when many people get together and give $5, $10, $30 or even $4,000, it makes a huge difference in many peoples lives.
 
It cost nothing to register at their site. I hope you will take a look and see the amazing things going on there when people like me and many others get together and pay it forward. Im not one of the administrators of the program, only a donor who believes in what they are doing. I think you will find many awesome stories of help given demonstrated through Modest Needs.
 
If you have any questions, Dr. Keith Taylor is the President of Modest Needs and his contact information is on the site. Thank you for your consideration of this organization as you decide how to pay forward the help you received.
 
Sincerely,
Bonnie B.
 
posted by Bonnie B.
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I was having trouble thinking of nominees, but in the Mac developer world there is a great podcast called Cocoa Radio, that does meet all of your requirements:
 
http://cocoaradio.com/
 
If you feel like supporting a podcast that serves a niche audience quite well, Im sure they would appreciate the gesture!
 
Daniel
 
posted by Daniel Jalkut
 on November 24, 2006 #
 
They have a noble goal of creating more useful information in communities, They have had a server crash, want them up
 
http://www.townvibes.com
 
Richard
 
posted by Richard Kai
 on November 25, 2006 #
 
Id second Musicbrainz, and also suggest the Open Rights Group who do good work in campaigning for digital freedoms in the UK and EU. (Yes, Im on their advisory board).
 
posted by Kevin Marks
 on November 25, 2006 #
 
cryptome.org
 
posted by Hoary
 on November 25, 2006 #
 
The Path to Freedom (http://pathtofreedom.com/journal/) is an amazing little site chronicling the path of one urban familys journey toward self-sufficiency, and their efforts to help all of us become less dependent.
 
They grow almost all of their own food on less than 1/5 of an acre (a typical urban plot) experiment with solar cooking, reuse water for gardening, hold gatherings to teach people how to brew biodiesel, show films (solar powered!).
 
Any kind of donation would not only help them, but would in turn help the thousands of other people they help, too.
 
Thanks for your consideration, and for your own good work!
 
posted by Michelle 
 on November 25, 2006 #
 
Aaron, do free software foundations/projects qualify for this (if they meet the criteria of having a website and having a paypal-able donation link)?
 
posted by 
 on November 25, 2006 #
 
Yeah, I suppose if Steal This Film qualifies then free software projects should as well.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 25, 2006 #
 
https://www.fsf.org/associate/support_freedom/donate
 
posted by asub
 on November 25, 2006 #
 
Okay, since someone already mentioned fsf, here are others I wanted to mention. Note: my criteria is the ratio between the importance of the project and the money given to it, not the technical opinion. For instance, I am not going to mention Linux or Apache, as those already have tons of money given to them (and for good reason, obviously). I mentioning the projects I consider vital, but that arent receiving much attention:
 
http://openssh.org/donations.html (OpenSSH project)
http://netbsd.org/ (NetBSD, has a donate button)
 
Id nominate ibiblio/UNC metalab, but I dont see a donate link on their site for an electronic donation, although they do take checks:
http://www.ibiblio.org/faq/?sid=2#19
 
Very good call nominating CCCP (comunity colo).
 
posted by 
 on November 27, 2006 #
 
This is an amazing idea.  Too many people in your postion would just accept the help from other and then continue on as if nothing had happened.  People like you are rare.
 
I would like to nominate Too Much About Nothing.  It is a wonderful blog written by a Pitt law student that is a great mix of philosophy, social commentary, everyday life (he was recently hit by a car while biking and he and his wife are expecting a child) and sports dorkery.  I know that they could certainly use the $$$
 
Thanks
 
posted by Christopher Ashley
 on November 28, 2006 #
 
I second the nomination for Too Much About Nothing.  M is a fantastic and thoughtful writer, and I always look forward to seeing what he has to say about current events, and of course, Stupid Human Tricks.
 
posted by Kara O'Bryon
 on November 29, 2006 #
 
I dont know if its in bad form to nominate your own site, but Ive got one called Google Notes that seems like a good candidate. Its a convenient notepad application that integrates into your Google Homepage. There are a few thousand regular users (i.e. who update their notes at least every couple of days), and our server got overloaded just before Thanksgiving. About a loooong week of downtime and many frustrated emails from users, things are back online.
 
Google Notes was first released in January and we only recently began accepting donations in the hopes of maintaining a high quality of service.
 
posted by David Hoelscher
 on December  6, 2006 #
 
I nominate gmane.org, an archive of zillions of mailing lists that you can read via nntp or a web browser. A request for donations is at http://gmane.org/faq.php (the hardware question).
 
posted by Jouni K Seppnen
 on December  6, 2006 #
 
How about the Firebug web development tool? Its only developer needs donations to keep the project afloat: getfirebug.com
 
posted by Brad
 on December  8, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 23, 2006
 
Title: Free Speech: Because We Can
 
In the field of Constitutional Law, there are many pages spent trying to come up with a reason for free speech. Its about the marketplace of ideas some say: by putting all claims and points of view out in the open, the public can sort through and figure out the truth, leaving the untruths to fall by the wayside. Others argue that free speech is necessary for democracy, since voters must hear different opinions to decide how to use their votes, and that since even non-political speech can change peoples views, all speech must then be protected.
 
There are many more justifications like this  a limit on government abuse, a policy to promote a more tolerant citizenship, etc.  but, like most justifications, they all say we should permit free speech because it allows us to do something else. And the frustrating thing about that is that it suggests that free speech should not be permitted when it doesnt achieve those goals.
 
Theorists of free speech are, in general, fans of the idea (or at least their market consists of fans) so they try to dance around this. Oh no, the marketplace-of-ideas partisans say, we werent suggesting that obviously false statements could be prohibited because, after all, you really never know when false statements could turn out to be true!
 
But, as something of a free speech absolutist, it troubles me that such a thing is even theoretically possible. And I worry that if others adopt this theory, they may not be so stringent about the practical requirements. The temptation to clamp down on free speech is always strong; its probably not a sound idea to build the principle on such a shaky foundation.
 
So I have my own justification for freedom of speech: because we can. Human freedom is important, so we should try to protect it from encroachment wherever possible. With most freedoms  freedom of motion, freedom of exchange, freedom of action  permitting them in full would cause some problems. People shouldnt be free to walk into other peoples bedrooms, take all their stuff, and then punch the poor victims in the face. But hurling a bunch of epithets at the guy really isnt so bad.
 
Freedom of speech is one place where we can draw the line and say: all of this is acceptable. Theres no further logic to it than that; freedom of speech is not an instrumental value. Like all freedom, its fundamental, and the only reason we happen to single it out is because its more reasonable than all of the others.
 
Close readers will note that this theory doesnt quite live up to my own goals. By laying freedom of speechs provision on top of our reasonable ability to do so, I suggest that freedom of speech could be taken away if providing it became unreasonable. But I think this is the right choice: if people really, seriously started getting hurt because of freedom of speech, it seems right for people to take the privilege away. But, to be honest, I cant even imagine how that might be possible. Words just dont genuinely wound, theyre always mediated by our listening.
 
I do worry that people might try to stretch this justification  say that continued free speech might destroy the war effort, or the government, or civil society. But I have no problem destroying all of those. Its only the destruction of actual people that I worry about.
 
So heres to free speech: because we can.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 23, 2006
 
I fail to see how speech is distinguished here from freedom of movement etc. You start off with the classical-liberal sort of notion of having an implicit human right to use your capacities which outside powers need a good reason to take away. Then you say speech is less dangerous than many other things, but frankly its not. What would you make of the basic clampdowns on speech that the US Supreme Court has sort of evolved over the years? (Libel, Treason, Obscenity, Direct incentive to harm (fire in a crowded theater), etc.) I disagree with a lot of the sedition/obscenity rulings but its true that there is speech that can actually literally hurt people, just as movement etc. can.
 
posted by Firas
 on November 24, 2006 #
 
The canonical example of free speech that can actually cause people to get hurt is yelling Fire! in a crowded theater.  The ensuing stampede for the exits is sure to cause one or more injuries.  And for that reason, such speech is indeed illegal.  See also, I believe, incitement to riot.
 
posted by PJ
 on November 25, 2006 #
 
I disagree with your claim that speech cant genuinely wound.
 
Do you think its immoral for someone on the street to slap me, moral fine for them to call me a nigger? If one can choose not to be hurt by the latter, tell me how.
 
posted by Andrew
 on November 28, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 23, 2006
 
Title: Bread and Cheese
 
It seems like every Western food culture has some combination of bread and cheese as a meal. Americans, simple people, have your basic grilled cheese. But Italians have the pizza. Then theres the mac-and-cheese. And of course Mexicans with their quesadilla. Then theres the cheese calzone. Not to mention cheese crepes. Throw in meat and you can also count the famed cheeseburger.
 
What is so magical about this combination?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 23, 2006
 
I like to survey the crisps of the world.  (You Americans of course say, chips[1].)
 
The Chinese have prawn crackers (and fortune cookies).  Indian cuisine gives us the pappadom (a very large crisp).  Mexican food has tortillas AND tacos.  Im sure there are others.
 
[1] To the British, chips are your fries, and a whole way of life.  As Bill Hicks said: I like fries, but come on!  Every meal?  Ive seen hookers on London streets crying, Head and chips.
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on November 23, 2006 #
 
Mexico is part of Western food culture?
 
posted by Dez
 on November 23, 2006 #
 
Fat + Carbs = Yum.  Simple as that I think.
 
posted by Mr
 on November 23, 2006 #
 
Re: Thomas and chinese crips
 
Fortune cookies are a japanese or chinese immigrant invention:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fortune_cookie#Origins_of_the_fortune_cookie
 
Prawn crackers are not chinese either: Indonesian and Malaysian
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prawn_cracker
 
posted by jm
 on November 24, 2006 #
 
Pizza may have been made famous by the Italians, but its origin came from a Jewish chef in the service of a Sultan in Baghdad. However, you are partly right, that the meat was likely added by somebody else (given that mixing a milk product (cheese) and meat is neither Kosher nor Halal).
 
However, meat + bread combination also exists in Mediterranean / Middle Eastern cuisine / Indian cuisine e.g. curry inside Naan bread, Gyros.
 
I dont think theres anything magical about this combination. To borrow from Extreme Programming terminology, its the simplest thing that could possibly work.
 
posted by 
 on November 24, 2006 #
 
Cheese has lots of saturated fat. Many cheeses are mostly saturated fat. As you know, Im not one for evolutionary explanations of human behavior but I think there might be one here in favor of our love for cheese. Its often as close to maximum nutrient density as you can get without drinking oil.
 
Bread (and other starches) provide a way to eat large amount of cheese without destroying our gall bladders or getting our fingers all greasy.
 
posted by mako
 on November 24, 2006 #
 
Bread and Cheese are easily storable foods - when theres nothing fresh to munch on and you havent managed to hunt anything edible, bread (stored grains) and cheese (stored milk) is what youve got left.
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on November 24, 2006 #
 
Bread and cheese were both staple foods from early periods of human civilization. People learned to put them together, and it stuck.
 
posted by Dustin
 on November 24, 2006 #
 
Re: Thomas
 
for chinese crisp
 
Sanzi (Deep-Fried Dough Twists)
 
Sanzi is one of traditional snacks of the Moslems. To make sanzi, use wheat flour mixed with vegetable oil and juice of the Chinese prickly ash. Knead the dough repeatedly, and then divide it into several pieces. Pull the dough into thin noodles and deep-fry in oil until golden yellow. During festivals, every Uygur family makes sanzi to treat guests.
(source: http://www.womenofchina.cn/quintessential_china/food/cuisine/3161.jsp )
 
posted by gourmet
 on November 24, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 21, 2006
 
Title: Identity Fetishism
 
Marx wrote incisively about commodity fetishismthe tendency of people to see only the results of production (commodities), ignoring the hours of human labor that actually created them. The humanities seems to suffer from something of the reverse problem: a tendency to be absorbed by the names of big people and not seeing beyond to the ideas they espouse.
 
The most extreme example is Leo Strauss, who encouraged his students to put aside their prejudices and fully imerse themselves in the worlds and minds of the greats. The greats were so great, Strauss suggested, that if you disagree with them, you probably just dont understand them well enough.
 
But even other teachers of philosophy have the same problem, presenting the views of X and Y even when X is pretty clearly wrong. Despite its absurdities, students must learn to understand Xs view. This seems fairly universal; even books like What is the Meaning of it All?, which explains philosophy without the names or complex terminology, still presents clearly bogus ideas on the same footing as more reasonable ones.
 
In other fields, this pattern is less frequent, but still there for whole courses of research. In sociology, papers must cite long-dead patron theorists to lend their empirical research an air of legitimacy by presenting it as a member of a recognized family. Even more recent works, like Annette Lareaus brilliant Unequal Childhoods, are at pains to show how they adhere to a theoretical model (the recently-alive Bourdieu in that case). In most other fields, the theorists take pains to make sure their work is consistent with the evidence, not the other way around.
 
Even in most humanities classes, the course content consists of a series of papers making arguments. The goal of the class is to understand the view of the authors and determine (in the best ones) to what extent you agree or disagree.
 
This isnt particularly unreasonable, but is a far cry from life in the hard sciences, where usually there is an actual consensus on some subject and otherwise there are a couple of named theories, each being developed by a group of people.
 
Why the diference? First, is it perhaps hard science thats in the wrong? I dont think so. The goal of science is to discover the truth about the world. Truths remain true no matter who says them and its unlikely that one person will discover the whole truth. Thus the pattern of letting multiple people develop a theory and try to find evidence for it to convince the others.
 
So why dont the softer sciences follow the same model? The problem gets worse the softer you get, which suggests the problem lies in the softness itself. The problem is that without identities, one has to judge the ideas themselves which, in a soft science is somewhat difficult to do.
 
Its easy in science to run an experiment and see if it proves a theory true or false, its much harder to get consensus about a reasonable theory of morality in philosophy. But it is easy to pick out the famous in academy culture and assign their stuff.
 
Identity fetishism thrives in a world afraid to make its own judgments. It exalts the thinkers of the past and, in doing so, diminishes its own capacities. But science must march forward instead of backward and that requires the daring to distinguish true from false.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 21, 2006
 
For a while I was worried you were going off the deep end into sociology yourself :) A very eloquent appraisal of what I view as a major problem with the soft sciences.
 
I assume youve read Feynman on this; if not, you ought to.
 
posted by David M.
 on November 22, 2006 #
 
The stuff of philosophy is ideas. Most of the stuff of hard sciences is material reality. Ideas need articulation. The greats are just those who articulated the ideas well.
 
Humanities courses do a fair bit of arguing about theories without references to greats. You can argue about democratic peace theory or whether protestantism fueled capitalism and western individualism without naming anyone.
 
The consensus model in the fields is exactly the same. The philosophy community chooses the great philosophers, thus establishing validity through consensus, just as the science community approaches consensus by filtering out theories they dont support, as human beings.
 
I find it rather surprising that you dont see the hard sciences straitjacketed by exactly the same we build on precedent notion of learning and teaching as the social ones are. Indeed the barrier to entry for a new idea in the social sciences is way lower than that in the hard sciences.
 
Clearly absurd thinkers and theories tend to fall by the wayside in both. I guess Im more prepared to relate endurance to quality (Darwinism of Ideas?) than you seem to be.
 
posted by Firas
 on November 22, 2006 #
 
David: I am going into sociology. No science is without its flaws.
 
Firas: Did you really just suggest that the discoveries of physics dont need to be articulated because they are material reality? What is it you think that hard scientists do?
 
I think endurance in philosophy is related to interestingness, not accuracy. Take utilitarianism. Maybe Im reading the wrong journals, but it seems like most of the effort is spent repeating old holes poked in the theory, not working on patching them up.
 
My complaint isnt that the field builds on precedent, its that it doesnt build enough: a new thinker introduces a theory and either lauds it or everyone pokes holes until a newer theory comes along. Theres very little group work trying to improve theories.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 22, 2006 #
 
Me thinks you should rethink this article in the light that the truth when it comes to social domains, does not exist. It is a myth.  All there is, are people, what they choose to believe, and the pursuit of a better truth.
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on November 22, 2006 #
 
Erm, no, if you look at the trajectory of Strauss work, he clearly rejects much of the work of the Greats: Heidegger, for just one example.  The point of Straussian hermeunetics is that understanding the greats as they understood themselves is just the required first step. After that has been achieved, then criticism is fully justified.
 
On a meta-level, one of Strauss main tenets was The Battle of the Ancients vs. Moderns, so the greats drastically disagree with each other - eventually, one needs to take some position and disagree with some of the greats at minimum.
 
posted by burritoboy
 on November 25, 2006 #
 
I agree with Aarons original point. There is far too much lingering in philosophy especially. This is precisely where people like Feynman step in.
 
One of the most primitive human clan instincts is to gain recognition and respect. In philosophy that means coming up with significant improvements to an existing theory, creating an entirely new theory or aligning yourself with a previous theory or school of theories. It would seem that aligning is much easier than actually doing original work. So maybe philosophy is in this state simply because its the path of least resistance (or path of greatest laziness).
 
posted by Brad Fults
 on December  2, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 20, 2006
 
Title: Disinfecting the Sunlight Foundation
 
For years, Mike Klein was a big-time D.C. corporate lawyer. Hed made millions starting a string of companies, including an air cargo carrier, a D.C. restaurant, a D.C. art gallery, and a real estate information database. But then Kleins son, aghast at the horrors of his government under Bush II, fled the country. Or, as Klein put it in an interview with the Harvard Law School Alumni Bulletin, My two sons led me to realize that a significant part of their generation thinks democracy isnt worth engagement or even respect. For an old 1960s activist like myself, that was the tipping point.
 
Its natural for a father to want to fix things for his sons (and perhaps for a wealthy D.C. lawyer to feel a bit guilty about it as well), so Klein, leaning a bit more on his corporate millions than his sixties activism, started a foundation. Taking its name from Justice Brandeiss famed comment that Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants, the Sunlight Foundation was formed to promote transparency and accountability in American government.
 
Most such organizations would do this by running investigations and publishing reports, but the Sunlight Foundation decided to take a different tack. Instead, as Klein put it, Sunlight would be utilizing 21st Century information technology, and Web 2.0 energy.
 
The Foundation was formed in January 2006 and, thanks to Klein, was quickly swimming in cash. Their first major project was Congresspedia, a Wikipedia-like site to keep track of information on members of Congress. Unlike most Web 2.0 sites, they bought large ads on the major political weblogs to promote the new site. (Despite this blanket promotion  and the hiring of a full-time editor  the site seems to have about the same level of activity as the They Might Be Giants wiki.)
 
Some of their other projects are about what youd expect: a federal funding-Google Maps mashup, a Congressional tag cloud, a video contest mocking of members of Congress who dont release their schedules. (Theyve also donated money to already-existing related projects, many of which are doing valuable work.)
 
Their most recent project was an invite-only conference in San Francisco to bring together the leaders in this nascent field. (Disclosure: I attended and just about everyone there from the Sunlight Foundation invited me to take their money.) Funder Klein hailed the Foundation as the most important and fastest-growing project hed ever started, while executive director Ellen Miller noted that this year theyd launched several projects, all of which had been successes. (Afterwards I asked her what her metric for success was. Were throwing stuff up on the wall and seeing what sticks, she explained. And success, I confirmed, means it hasnt completely fallen apart yet.)
 
As a Web 2.0 developer, its hard for me to see how even the best Web 2.0 site can have much of a positive impact on government. Genuinely promoting transparency requires the hard work of doing investigative research, publishing reports, and promoting them to the media. Bubble 2.0 hype aside, the fanciest pop-up windows and and Google Maps mashups wont change that.
 
The attendees seemed to begin to recognize this. In a breakout session on reaching users, a guru from Web 2.0 consultancy Adaptive Path tried to walk us through their user experience process. Remember, she told us, these sites arent about what you want to do; theyre about improving the lives of your users by connecting with their real needs. We gave our example user a name (Jane) and backstory (too busy driving her kids to care about politics, but upset at the high gas prices she has to pay). And thats where we got stuck. Is Jane really going to muddle through graphs generated from FEC reporting data?
 
We decided our saviors would be the Paul Reveres  the people who care enough about politics to slog through the data and then mass email their friends when they find something good (we concluded that going after newspaper reporters was too Web 1.0). They would save us from having to write reports or take positions; all we had to do was make the data available and let them do the rest.
 
Im sure there are a handful of people who actually do this, but it seems like were spending an awful lot to build a site just for them. And even then, what impact will they have? Even if our Paul Revere finds the smokingest of smoking guns and posts it on their extremely popular blog, without a larger political platform it will only fuel the cynicism that Klein claims hes trying to combat. (There they go again, the reader thinks, and hits the back button.)
 
Even if Klein is for some reason averse to taking an actual political stand (maybe he doesnt vote the same way as his sons?), theres still much to be done. Several people in the session were from the group that runs the opensecrets.org website, which details who contributes to which campaign. Its useful stuff, but even a hundred of their reports cant compare to their old-fashioned, dead-trees book Speaking Freely, which brilliantly details the big picture of how money politics actually works. The author of the book, Larry Makinson, was in the room, but instead of figuring out how to tell more stories like that, he was busy worrying about how to make specific numbers come alive.
 
But what makes Speaking Freely so brilliant is that it shows specifics arent the problem. Its not that donors bribe politicians into changing their vote  they rarely do  its that the entire campaign finance system forces all our public officials to bend and scrape before big-money donors, instead of actually listening to the voters.
 
Such clear analysis makes the solution clear as well: we need to get rid of privately-financed elections altogether. And, in fact, there is an organization doing just that. Its called Public Campaign and, considering the enormous odds its up against, its having incredible success. (Arizona, Connecticut, and Maine have all adopted clean elections and smaller projects have been started in six more states.) But the Sunlight Foundation isnt giving money to Public Campaign. To the contrary, many of its top people used to work there.
 
Public Campaign is just one example; the larger point is that just as Web 2.0 pixie dust doesnt automatically make your web site into a success, just making important data available wont cause political change. Justice Brandeiss clever aphorism to the contrary, sunlight is not in fact the best disinfectant; actual disinfectant is. Sunlight just makes it easier for people to look at the pus.
 
The Sunlight Foundation responds: Many people from the Sunlight Foundation have thoughtfully written to me. Aside from our general disagreement about the value of the projects Sunlight engages in, they make several specific points. Since they havent provided any letters for publication, Ill try to summarize them as fairly as I can:
 
Its not a zero-sum game. The open data work that Sunlight funds helps projects like Public Campaign by giving them ammunition. Center for Responsive Politics data makes it into corruption stories in newspapers which, in turn, has made the issue of clean elections a more serious part of the public debate.
 
Sunlight has many other projects. Theyve provided serious grants to a number of organizations  including the Center for Responsive Politics  and have a number of projects, including hiring some bloggers, doing distributed journalism on Congresss Family Business, getting 90 candidates to sign their Punch Clock Agreeement, and even writing an old-fashioned report.
 
Sunlight has a good relation with Public Campaign. Mike Klein has made donations to Public Campaign on his own; Ellen Miller started Public Campaign but left long before she joined Sunlight; Micah Sifry was already lowering the amount of time he spent working for Public Campaign before he joined Sunlight.
 
I dont dispute any of these points, but I think the brunt of my critique still stands. Changes to the culture of Washington must be structural ones. These projects, while fun, fundamentally misunderstand how institutions operate.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 20, 2006
 
Wow. Theres a dude who needs to have a Bill Gates Moment.
 
posted by misuba
 on November 20, 2006 #
 
And here I was hoping for an expose of the were-nonpartisian-we-just-happen-to-have-lots-of-ultraconservatives line.
 
Im sure there are a handful of people who actually do this, but it seems like were spending an awful lot to build a site just for them.
 
If done right, it can be worth it - e.g. see Wikipedia. A problem is it takes a million or two for starters, but that seems to be covered. $1 milllion of website development for $10 million of free opposition research would be a good deal.
 
And even then, what impact will they have? Even if our Paul Revere finds the smokingest of smoking guns and posts it on their extremely popular blog, without a larger political platform 
 
Exactly! Completely correct. And the cynical observers say that the solution here is that the result will be providing of unpaid labor to those who have that larger political platform. And it can just be a sorting effect - only those items helpful to the larger political platform gain traction (while simulataneously being shouted to the skies as triumphs of citizen journalism, pay no attention to the moneybags behind the curtain ).
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on November 21, 2006 #
 
The next thing to aggregate after news is action.
 
posted by Dan Stowell
 on November 21, 2006 #
 
Public funding of political campaigns is the way to go. Weve done that in France and even if it doesnt solve all the issues, it clears at least some of the worries about independance and representing the people.
 
Now Im not sure a few Web 2.0 sites will be enough to drive this change. Over here, the change was driven by huge financing scandals where parties from both sides admitted to diverting public money to finance the campaigns.
 
posted by Laurent
 on November 23, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 19, 2006
 
Title: San Francisco: Silicon Valleys Ghetto
 
Big American cities have a shameful history of setting up smaller ones into which to punt the workers who make their city run. In Amazing Grace, Jonathan Kozol writes heart-wrenchingly about life in East St. Louis. And a little closer to home, in the shining Valley city of Palo Alto, the workers and their families (as usual, mostly people of color) are shunted into East Palo Alto at the end of the day.
 
Not only does this keep the workers and their families out of sight and out of crime, but it has beneficial political effects too. The workers may elect their own mayor, who is economically powerless to do anything about their plight, and they may attend their own school system, maintaining the new racial and economic segregation of American schools. (Incidentally, Stanford recently purchased East Palo Alto High School so it can run experiments on the poor children.)
 
It would be absurd and offensive to compare life in San Francisco to life in these impoverished neighborhoods, but I cant help but feel there are some structural similarities. Whatever else San Francisco is, it is a reaction to the Valley. Many of the people Ive met here are doing their best to escape their stifling Silicon Valley jobs, taking the bus or train or car every day into work, then running back as soon as they can.
 
The result is that San Francisco ends up being something like the opposite of the Valley. The Valley has its clean if gray office buildings in neat squares; San Francisco has its rough and random dirty shops and houses drizzled across hillsides. The Valley is full of conservative corporate behavior; San Francisco is full of left-wing activists. The Valley is where people work, so San Francisco is where they play, throwing frisbees in parks and hanging out in coffee shops or going to dance parties at night. The Valley is a place of businesslike behavior; in San Francisco people hug deeply when they meet. (Not everyone, of course; none of this is everyone, but more than enough to be noticeable.)
 
The result, like some Marxist dialectic, is that neither the City nor the Valley really feel real. Both are reacting against each other, playing off their faults, waiting for some synthesis to put the pieces back together. The result is, to be sane you have to be in both.
 
City people refer to Palo Alto as Shallow Alto, which might even be literally true. The city is a thin strip of road, surrounded on one side by houses and on the other by offices, with Stanford behind it and other cities in front. It is, perhaps, a decent place to work  the finest upscale fakery you can find along relatively clean streets where even the homeless are white  but its apparently a terribly boring place to live.
 
Meanwhile the city is all action. People are intellectually lazy here, complains one resident. You can zip around on bikes and scooters, drop into parties and nightclubs, gab with friends, eat good food, stroll by shops, do everything but actually get work done. People here are fleeing from work, not looking for it.
 
And so, to live, you ping-pong back and forth. A job you hate in the Valley, but you have to keep it so that it pays the exorbitant rent in the City, which you have to live in to escape the deadliness of the Valley. High highs, low lows, bright nights, dark days.
 
I suspect the City works as an escape valve in other ways. Instead of unioninizing your big corporate employer, you simply flee to a False Profit party, secure in your anti-capitalist sentiment. Instead of working to build a better life, you go out dancing with your friends, trying to enjoy the little time you have.
 
Which, I have to say, is better than most. Most office drones just go home and watch TV, their work having drained from them the energy for any more productive activity. I suspect some of the difference lies in the peculiar economics of the computer industry. The people in it are unusually smart and talented. And the barriers to entry are so low that if they wanted to they could start their own thing (and, as the startup world shows, many do). So perhaps one has to heighten the distractions to keep them busy.
 
But who knows? Ive got a party to get to.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 19, 2006
 
Personally I like working all out and then parting all out, but then again I enjoy both my work time and my play time.
Is most of the work in the valley boring? I was under the opposite impression [Ive never been Silicon Valley].
 
posted by Holden Karau
 on November 19, 2006 #
 
While I respect your right to express your view, I believe, in this case, that your view is extremely skewed, nave and reactionary.
 
It is surely true that where there is a larger concentration of corporate business (the Valley), there is a more pervasive clean-cut work attitude. Its also true that San Francisco (the City) is much more eclectic and amorous than the Valley. Stating that one feeds off of the other in the way that you describe, though, is a beginners mistake.
 
The City has deep roots in its crazy/funky/cool culture, dating back much farther than the Valley or anything else equally trite around it. The City is being nothing but itself. It doesnt react to or leech off or bend for anything other than itself. Treating the City as anything other than the extremely autonomous, complex being that has grown to be is insulting to those who make up the City and its entirely unique identity.
 
The City does not react to the Valley. The City does not need the Valley. The Valley is a side effect that can account for its own corporate stodginess and lack of character through pure introspection. The City doesnt respect the Valley precisely because it lacks true character and true quality.
 
Embrace the City. Live in it, with it and through it. Experience the good, the bad and the truly unique things that the City has to offer. Do all of that and become a part of the City without insulting it with this drivel; either that or go back to Boston.
 
posted by Brad Fults
 on November 19, 2006 #
 
Theres plenty of boring corporate offices in the financial district. In fact, the jobs are likely far more of the soul-draning in those offices, than any of the jobs in the city (I have tons of coworkers from the city who pretty much say the same  all the jobs in the city, are pretty much, 9-5 dress-code-required type). There also does exist a conservative constituency in the city (theres a good article in Reason about that whole community, which I just am not able to find it, which is also mostly socially conservative Catholics), albeit small, but very well connected.
 
Likewise, The Valley is still a liberal/Democratic strong hold, with perhaps a few libertarian leaning types (but likely even fewer
 
posted by 
 on November 20, 2006 #
 
Doh the reply got eaten. Wonder if this is an issue with firefox or the blog software.
 
In any case, heres the rest:
 
Likewise, The Valley is still a liberal/Democratic strong hold, with perhaps a few libertarian leaning types (but likely even fewer
 
posted by 
 on November 20, 2006 #
 
Aha, double quotes is what is causing the reply to get eaten. Is this a bug or this an intended feature?
 
Again, here is second paragraph onwards:
 
Likewise, The Valley is still a liberal/Democratic strong hold, with perhaps a few libertarian leaning types (but likely even fewer God and Gays (*) conservatives than in the city). While there are indeed more office parks, many of the places are very much unlikely the Dilbertesque cube-farms and offer significant choices to the employees. The Valley is also not without a non-corporate culture: theres plenty of independent book stores, independent coffee shops  especially in places like Palo Alto, Mountain View and Downtown San Jose.
 
The real difference is not political, nor economic. Its cultural: people who are used to East Coast urban cores generally dont last long in the valley and move up to San Francisco; likewise, people brought in bedroom communities / suburbia of say, Southern California, would prefer suburban Silicon Valley.
 
God and Gays was meant to double quoted, but this is apparently what caused the rest of the comment to the cut off.
 
posted by 
 on November 20, 2006 #
 
Thats a pretty broad brush, Aaron.
 
It is extremely fashionable to riff on how suburbs are isolating, soul-deadening gardens of commercialism, but it is also starting to get really tiresome.  Ive lived for 4 years in the valley, and for 4 years before that I lived in a big city.  I have met at least as many interesting people living in suburbia as I did in my previous, more urban, setting.  There are some things missing from suburbia, like live music.  But there are plenty of things missing from cities as well - such as the ability to get away from people.  I can ride my bike 30 minutes up into the hills and be totally alone.
 
Its not as black and white as you make it.  Sure, if you visit the suburbs once you might think theres nobody here but bluetooth-headset-shouting, bmw-driving assholes, but youd be wrong.  Just like youd be wrong if you visited the city once and thought that everybody there was an insufferable hipster.
 
Oh, and Brad Fults:  Arrogant, too cool for their shoes, pseudo-enlightened assholes like you are the half the reason I dont live in SF. The city does not need the valley?  Hah!  Take a look at 101 tomorrow morning and tell me how many people drive back and forth between the two every day.  Both the valley and the city would be shadows of their current selves if they were removed from each other.
 
posted by Mark
 on November 20, 2006 #
 
There are a lot of people in the City. There are a lot of people in the Valley.
 
We are all in our little bubbles. It sounds like you, personally, interact with corporate people in the Valley and party people in the City. So there are your stereotypes. Act accordingly.
 
posted by talboito
 on November 20, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
The bottom line is that there are City people and Suburb people, and never the twain shall meet.  Even when I was an undergrad at Stanford, I despised San Francisco, and prayed that I would never have to live there.
 
I would also agree that for the highly-educated, mostly white overclass of the Bay Area, its unclear that San Francisco is any more authentic than the Valley.  At least the Valley is honest about what it is.  The City pretends to be a multi-cultural, egalitarian haven, when in fact few of the techie class that lives there interacts with poor minorities outside of retail salespeople, their gardeners, and their nannies.
 
posted by Chris Yeh
 on November 20, 2006 #
 
No I totally agree with this.  While I work in the city (I still work for a nice gray institution that drains every ounce of energy out of my body) and live in the city - I agree.  I have lived here for almost 5 years and feel caught in the hamster wheel of working to live & pay rent and then trying to fit in all the other things about the city in my free time (that is not consumed with sleeping).  I feel like when I pop out of SF (I am a Cali native) - I am going to wonder where the last 5 years went.
 
posted by Kitsune
 on November 20, 2006 #
 
Youve hit the nail on the head, for my experience at least  which is almost identical to yours. A lot of geek imports to the Valley feel the same way.
 
But these places existed long before tech got here, and will exist long after.
 
SF has the among most vibrant local political and social cultures in the entire USA, so they have a future after tech has gone. But theres no denying that the techie lifestyle refugees have an impact; if they were the only economic force, SF would just become a theme-park of what it used to be.
 
You might like Hollow City by Rebecca Solnit. Its a rambling but heartfelt essay on what the first boom did to SF. Theres also a stab at defining the economic history of artists in SF.
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on November 24, 2006 #
 
The City has been around a lot longer than Silicon Valley - it has its own thing going on.
 
There may seem to be many people commuting from SF to the Valley, but I would bet you the actual number of commuters is fewer than 20,000 people. Most San Francisco residents actually work in San Francisco.
 
And if you are truly looking for Silicon Valleys ghetto, you seem to have overlooked San Jose
 
year 2000 report on actual number of SV communters: http://tinyurl.com/ybkrxd
 
posted by Norcal Barney
 on November 25, 2006 #
 
Norcal Barney is right: San Jose is Silicon Valleys ghetto.  It is the only US city of more than 500,000 people that actually loses population during the day when people go to work.  Thats why it cant shake its reputation as a bedroom community (since thats precisely what it is).
 
San Francisco, on the other hand, gains several hundred thousand people during the day (not including tourists).  It may seem like no one works in SF if you dont live here, but the City is headquarters of WellsFargo, Bank of the West, Del Monte, GAP, Levis, Charles Schwab, The 9th Circuit Court of Appeals, The California Supreme Court, and thousands of other companies, magazines, non-profits, and government agencies.  The Bay Bridge is also the busiest bridge in the country (slightly busier than the George Washington bridge in NY) - not sure what all those people are doing on the bridge coming over from the East Bay in the morning if its not to go to work downtown.
 
Note that all daytime population figures come from the US Census: http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/daytime/daytimepop.html
 
posted by richardofmystery
 on February  3, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 18, 2006
 
Title: Ostensible Networks vs. Friendship Networks
 
I visited New York last weekend and although Id physically been there many times before, this was the first time I felt like Id really seen the city. Ostensibly, its very easy to go to New York. There are lots of plane tickets available online and then you can book a hotel right there. Ive done this many times before and every time I came away feeling like I hadnt really seen New York, but only bits and pieces made available for tourist consumption. I didnt feel like I understood the city.
 
It wasnt until this time, when I stayed with generous friends, that I felt I really saw the city. They showed me cute little places to eat, explained how to use the impossibly complex transit system, pointed me to maps and websites to help, recommended good spots to see at good times, and simply let me be with actual New Yorkers. I saw New York through the eyes of a New Yorker.
 
Now there are ostensible systems to help with all of these. There are guidebooks to recommend restaurants and infodesks and posters to explain how things work, but they never really can surpass the power of a friend.
 
If you look, you see ostensible networks everywhere. Ostensibly, jobs are posted in the want ads, but you can definitely snag one if you have a friend. Ostensibly, there are bureaucratic rules that must be followed, but usually can bypass them with a friend on the inside. Ostensibly, academic fields are learnable by anyone, but to really understand them you need a friend to take you through it. Ostensibly, web sites are supposed to be clear enough that anyone can use them, but for most of them you need a friend to show you how its done.
 
A lot of people dont realize the importance of friendship networks. They think the world largely works the way its ostensibly supposed to. You do good work, you follow the rules, you get noticed, you get the benefits. And when they fail to succeed or comprehend, its probably because theyre stupid or somebody isnt following the system. But its neither of those, its the system thats stupid  you dont succeed through hard work, you succeed through friendship networks.
 
This has clear implications for ones personal behavior: when you want to do something, dont follow the rules but look for a friend. (Sure, you could stay in a New York hotel  but youd be much better off sleeping on the floor of a friend.) And build up lots of friends so that youll be able to call on them when you need them. (Find a book you really like? Send the author a friendly note.)
 
But it also has systematic implications. Because our friendship networks are so skewed towards others like us, making things dependent of friendship networks serves as a subtle form of discrimination and exclusion. A stranger in the middle of Nebraska will have a hard time learning Geology because they dont know any geologists. A writer living deep in Kansas will have a hard time getting their work published because few of the publishers have ever heard of them.
 
There are two ways to fight this. One is to be more generous about finding friends. Get to know random people who email you, talk to people on the plane or at the theater, take part in activities that go beyond your typical location and social stratum.
 
But these techniques can only go so far  despite my best efforts, Ill never be able to even consider being friends with the vast majority of the worlds population. The better option is to help move things from friendship networks to ostensible networks, to document the cool places in New York City, to start websites where you can find people to stay with, to not automatically give jobs and perks to friends, to build things clear enough that anyone can use them.
 
Sure, it can be hard to say no to a friend. But wouldnt you want someone to extend you the same courtesy?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 18, 2006
 
Youve just described a fraction of Ruby Paynes work: the middle-class and wealthy paradigms of life. You missed her impoverished paradigm. She is ruthless about acknowledging class in America. Many  dislike her. Worth googling.
 
Her first book was the biggie, A Framework for Understanding Poverty (1995). bookfinder.com if you want a first edition.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on November 18, 2006 #
 
I started a campaign a few months ago to build myself a friendship network. I wonder if you have any further pointers on how to do it, particularly for us non-jet-setters. So far Ive had limited success.
 
posted by David M.
 on November 18, 2006 #
 
Its not what you know, its who you know.
 
Very true.
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on November 18, 2006 #
 
Well, one way to encourage friendship among people you havent met yet is to post a link to their new project on http://thestartupnews.com/ when they ask you.
 
;)
 
posted by Denis
 on November 18, 2006 #
 
If the networks you describe were two different kinds of games, wouldnt the latter kind (the friendship one) be more fun to play?
 
posted by Tommi
 on November 19, 2006 #
 
I agree the best sort of travel, is one where the local hosts and shows you around. In the past I have pulled on my debating and free software community contacts.
 
I also heard of a Web site where this sort of local hosting is coordinated.
 
http://www.hospitalityclub.org/
 
posted by Kai Hendry
 on November 26, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 16, 2006
 
Title: Kahle v. Ashcroft write-up
 
Heres a writeup I did of the Kahle v. Ashcroft argument in the style of a Wired News piece. Unlike my last parody of Wired News, this one actually got posted on wired.com, albeit only on one of their blogs. I hope to write a real post about this but Im feeling too crummy to do it today.
 
SAN FRANCISCO, CaliforniaAcclaimed Stanford professor Lawrence Lessig and Internet Archive founder Brewster Kahle argued Monday that the changes in the Copyright Act should be subject to the scrutiny of the First Amendment. In the case Kahle v. Gonzales, argued here at the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, Brewster Kahle is arguing that he should be permitted to make orphaned worksworks whose copyright holder can no longer be locatedavailable for free on his website.
 
The case began after Lessigs loss before the Supreme Court in his previous suit, Eldred v. Ashcroft. Lessig argued that Congresss perpetual extension of the copyright act violated the Constitutions requirement that copyright only be granted for limited Times. The Court disagreed, saying that Congress was allowed to modify copyright law as long as it didnt change the laws traditional contours.
 
Now Lessig is back, arguing that Congress has done just that. For nearly two hundred years, he notes, copyright has been an opt-in system. Authors who wanted their work to be copyrighted had to mark it with a copyright symbol, file a registration with the Copyright Office, deposit a copy with the Library of Congress, and file a renewal if they wanted to receive the full term. All that changed with the sweeping 1976 Copyright Act, which made a work copyrighted as soon as it was fixed in a tangible form.
 
Under the old system, according to Lessig, 93% of works went into the public domain before their term had expired. Now, 0% do.
 
Lessig argues that such a fundamental change  moving copyright from an opt-in to an opt-out system  constitutes a change in the laws traditional contours and thus, under the precedent set in Eldred, means the law must be examined by a Court to see if it violates the First Amendment.
 
The Government disagrees, insisting that the only traditional contours the Eldred decision refers to are the fair use provision of the copyright law, which allows for the public to make certain uses of copyrighted works, and the idea-expression dichotomy, which means that ideas cannot be directly copyrighted, only their expression. The 1976 law did not change either of these.
 
The judges hearing the case asked Lessig to explain how this case differed from Eldred. In Eldred the argument was about whether Congress could retrospectively extend the copyright law to keep Mickey Mouse out of the public domain, he explained. This case is only about orphaned works  works whose copyright holders cant even be tracked down to give permission. Unlike Disney, the judge added.
 
The Kahle case is part of a multi-pronged strategy to deal with orphaned works. Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren (D-CA) has introduced a bill called the Public Domain Enhancement Act. The idea, based on a New York Times op-ed published by Lessig shortly after his loss in Eldred, is that copyright holders will need to send $1 to the government after 50 years to renew their copyright. If they dont send the dollar, their works will go into the public domain. But even if they do, their name and address will be on file so others who wish to use the work will know how to contact them.
 
The US Copyright Office has also held hearings on the subject of orphaned works, concluding in a hundred-page report sent to the Senate Judiciary Committee that The orphan works problem is real. and Legislation is necessary to provide a meaningful solution to the orphan works problem as we know it today.
 
Plaintiff Brewster Kahle founded the Internet Archive after selling his company Alexa to Amazon.com in the 1990s. The site, as Kahle often says, provides infinite bandwidth and infinite disk space for infinite time to freely-licensed works. Kahle wants to have his website provide orphaned works, just as libraries make available out-of-print books, but under current law would have to track down the copyright holder for every work.
 
The same problem plagues projects like Googles Book Search. Presently, Google must track down the copyright holder before making a book publicly available or face hefty fines. But since copyright terms are now so long, this means most out-of-print books will never be available, simply because their copyright holders are so difficult to find.
 
The Court is expected to rule on the case sometime next year.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 16, 2006
 
I posted a shorter (more bloggy) post with a link to the oral argument audio recording here:
 
http://copyrightings.blogspot.com/2006/11/kahle-v-gonzalez.html
 
Thought youd be interested.
 
posted by Kevin
 on November 23, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 15, 2006
 
Title: Office Space
 
People are always asking me how I manage to get so much done. For a while I tried to impress them with my pearls of wisdom but soon I just sort of gave up. I dont really feel like I do anything special  I worry about getting stuff done a lot, but mostly I just sort of do it.
 
It wasnt until I started working in an office that the question begun to make sense. Since I moved to San Francisco I literally havent gotten anything done. I havent finished a book (I finished three on the plane out here), I havent answered many emails (I used to answer hundreds a day), Ive written only a couple blog posts (I used to do one a day), and I havent written a line of code (I used to write whole programs in the evenings). Its a pretty incredible state of affairs.
 
You wake up in the morning, take some crushing public transit system or dodge oncoming traffic to get to work, grab some food, and then sit down at your desk. If youre like most people, you sit at a cube in the middle of the office, with white noise buzzing around on every side. Were lucky enough to get our own shared office, but its not much better since its huge windows overlook a freeway and the resulting white noise is equally deadening.
 
Wired has tried to make the offices look exciting by painting the walls bright pink but the gray office monotony sneaks through all the same. Gray walls, gray desks, gray noise. The first day I showed up here, I simply couldnt take it. By lunch time I had literally locked myself in a bathroom stall and started crying. I cant imagine staying sane with someone buzzing in my ear all day, let alone getting any actual work done.
 
Nobody else seems to get work done here either. Everybodys always coming into our room to hang out and chat or invite us to play the new video game system that Wired is testing. The upside is that while we havent gotten much of our work done, we have managed to do many other peoples. Various folks from around the office have shown up to have us help them with their technical problems, which we usually solve fairly quickly. We joked that we should get transferred to their IT department instead of Web development.
 
Weve been spared most of the brunt of it, but their IT policy is pretty scary. Theres a company Internet connection, which routes everything through the IT HQ in Delaware, presumably the better to spy on us on. On Day 1 they took our laptops and backed up the drives to ensure they had a copy of all our data. (We scurried to get our MP3 collections and worse off first.)
 
Then they issued us company-approved laptops: terribly-slow iBook G4s complete with Conde Nast desktop and screensaver with spy software pre-installed. When they gave us the machines we didnt even have administrator access on them. The clock was set to the Eastern time zone; I needed an IT department person to change it to show me California time.
 
The company laptop is necessary to read our company email which, being on a Microsoft Exchange server, requires a special Microsoft email client to read. You also need to be on a company laptop to access the company network, where you can log into a maze of PeopleSoft web sites to file expense reports and change your health benefits.
 
I feel wiped after dealing with this non-work for a couple hours, but I cant get any rest from lying on our couch because it too is surrounded by the white noise.
 
Finally at 5 the office empties out and I can go home where, to compensate for the dullness of the days, I brighten up the nights. Life-threatening bicycle rides, dinners and movies with friends, museums, running along the beach, navigating the nightmare of public transit to visit the new hot spot. And if I get home early there are the roommates eager to chat about their days. By the time I break away its midnight, if not 3am. I had to spend much of the weekend sleeping just to catch up.
 
And then its back to the grind once again. A carousel that never stops to let you get off.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 15, 2006
 
Im not sure what the terms of your acquisition are, but you have to get out of that office. Work at home or a coffee shop. Heck, code in a notebook in the park. Itd be more productive.
 
posted by Dan Stowell
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
Ouch.
 
I have a theory that a company would be served by having all employees and all management write a daily blog, publicly viewable.  When hiring, an applicant can read the blogs of his would-be co-workers and would-be manager.  Reading, searching for cluelessness.
 
People dont like to write, people dont like to think.  Those are the first two problems with that idea.
 
You could use tricks to make daily writing painless.  A company could hire a cartoonist, to draw a daily cartoon without words, and all employees would have to compose a caption.  Or, more mundanely, give out a daily short creative writing exercise.
 
The professional world makes cluelessness easy to hide.  If the suit and offices are respectable enough, almost any form of brain-damage or psychosis can be hidden for decades.
 
My advice, literally chain yourself to your bosss desk (for added drama, use a chain of Kryptonite bicycle locks, the last one around your neck), and demand a private, acoustically dead office.  The halfway measures you will try over the next few months (begging, pleading, passive-aggressive behavior) will be more humiliating in aggregate, and not as effective.
 
posted by manuelg
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
Yeah, most people dream of becoming a millionaire so they can quit coming into the office, not start.
 
Cant you work at home? It seems like Wired would be down with that.
 
posted by Carl
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
Sounds like soon youll be ready to leave and start working on the next big thing.
 
Cant wait to see what it is, from the little I know about you, Id suggest thinking big :)
 
With the Democratic congress, have you thought of a startup that makes simple/secure voting equipment?
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
I work down the way from your office at UCSF in Mission Bay. I was suffering from similar problems and ended up petitioning to occupy some empty space we have. After some special meetings my request was approved and I now find myself in a large empty space with only a few other people about 20 meters away. In other words, peace, quiet, and a great view of the bay. Which equals me getting lots of work done and not wanting to even leave to go home.
 
Corporate thinking is backwards. Make your employees happy. Give them a space to think and dont limit anything they can do.
 
Google seems to be doing lots of things right.
 
But in the meantime, if you need an empty and quiet desk with a great, albeit industrial, east facing view of the bay, let me know :).
 
posted by Sean
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Aaron, your plight (if I can call SF and lots of money a plight) totally reminds me of the short film More
 
I sympathise with you about e-mail. Tulane has decided the open source mail systems that survived Katrina just arent good enough so theyre switching to Microsoft Exchange. We are now limited to 100 MB on the server (whats that, a couple PowerPoint decks?), and if we want to centrally manage our email then we have to use Microsofts client-side program to download the e-mail to a PC, and then forward from that weak link back to our gmail, yahoo, whatever account.
 
Maybe the Vista release was a distraction while Microsofts real mission was to infiltrate more corporate servers and continuing their hold on the clientside market.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I used to work in a high-distraction office like that. I got myself moved to more private, quieter space  it made an enormous difference to my sanity and productivity.
 
Maybe you guys need to get your own separate office space, not even in the Wired building. Now is the time to make noise about it.
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Success should only be measured by the satisfaction you receive from your work.  Selling out to DorkCorp  is a sure way to fail. Find the nearest exit and go start another venture.  Reddit will die a slow horrid corporate death and we will all cry but at least you will save your own soul.
 
posted by Johnny Pops
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
What you need to do is to start cultivating the afternoon nap. After they find you slumped over your keyboard asleep 3 or 4 times, theyll give you gardening leave and a severance package. And then you can go back to real life and doing what you actually want to do!
 
Working in corporates sucks. Its the red zone. Every time you want to do something theres a red stop light that says Wrong Way.
 
posted by Julian Bond
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Take solace in the fact that builders (programmers, engineers, etc.) are very often hindered by environments that sap creativity and productivity, so youre in no way alone.  Its why every engineer wants to work at Google  building employee ideas are the core of the business.  Most companies lose that startup-ishness over time as they feel pressure to milk their successes rather than continue to innovate.
 
posted by Josh
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I wont disagree with you, so Can you get fired on your first day?
 
posted by  Berlin Brwon
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Speak for yourself, man.
 
posted by Steve Huffman
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Working at Reddit: Wired
Working at Wired: Tired
 
posted by Morgs
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
You have a lot of balls.
 
I would never write something like this until Ive left the company, and even then, would wait at least 1-2 years so as to not burn any bridges.
 
Ive been working from home full-time for the last 6 months and will find it hard to ever go back to a daily commute.
 
posted by Shanti Braford
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I second the sentiment recommending you escape; I fled my evil office-environment overlords about a year ago, and Ive been increasingly happy, sane, and productive ever since.
 
You owe it to yourself to fight for change - and if anyone is dumb enough to put bureaucratic roadblocks in your way, youve got a large and potentially highly influential sympathetic audience here at reddit ;-)
 
posted by Apoch
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Of course while negotiations, both you and the Corp said the words about  you continuing to work on your project after the takeover, but you did not take it seriously, did you?
 
posted by Lukewarm Earthcrawler
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I had a similar experience. It was a brutal shock. My advice: run, run for your life!!! if not, you may quickly feel your brain shrink into oblivion
 
posted by Boazinho
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I echo someone elses comment here, you do have a lot of balls! Having said that I have been through something very similar and found that a switch of environments is almost always painful and involves a couple of months of getting used to. Use your ipod with noise canceling headphones for the sound. Search the office for a less noisy place, even if Wired doesnt have enough space for offices for everyone I am sure they have some cubicles in an area where not many people walk by.
 
Finally, the thing that should give you the most hope is that people are nice. Amongst the kind of people I expect to work at Wired, I would also expect people who have founds ways and means of getting around the draconian IT policy. I know people at my company who have. Hell you may even find a sympathetic IT admin for some inside help ;)
 
posted by Ajju
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I respect your sincerity in our falsehood filled world.
 
posted by Firk
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Hi Aaron. Thats a nice little business conundrum you got there. My advice is to talk about this with the people you made the deal with/ the people who have some sort of interest in reddit and the power to make executive decisions. 
Focus on how reddit brings value to them and explain how the current office environment will destroy that value, how they will make less profit both short and long term. Explain that the value they get from reddit and from the reddit crew depends on certain work conditions. Then youll find out if they understand what youre talking about and hopefully ask what conditions youd like.
But remember, talk to the people who have the power to decide, not your nearest boss, and talk about value, cost efficiency and profit. It might piss your boss off but its the only way to get a change.
 
posted by Rikard Linde
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Mail.app speaks Exchange, though I doubt they support its use.
 
posted by Matt
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Thanks for giving us such a candid account of your experience.  Sorry to hear its been so grim.  I can sort of understand, I work for a huge corporation and its not really any different.  Then again, Ive never sold a start-up company so clearly our parallels are limited.  Good luck to you brother.
 
Dan D.
 
posted by Dan D.
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Sjeez Aaron,
I like your candor, I hope Wired does too and gets this sorted out asap. 
Good luck.
 
posted by wowbagger
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I realize our Somerville conversations werent exactly epic but I have to say you seemed pretty damn happy sleeping in a cramped corner and cranking out code all night. My gut says you should go back to your roots, being happy doesnt require the money Wired is dangling in front of your nose. Just look at Paul; he has all the money in the world, drives a Jetta instead of a Porsche, and hangs out with cash strapped students for fun.
 
posted by Jeff C.
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Yes, it all seems awful, but please do make the bike rides a little less life-threatening and go buy (and use!) a helmet.
 
posted by t'mo
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Wow, interesting.  Im surprised Wired offices are like this, especially the part about being fairly non-flexible on computer issues.  And old G4 iBooks? Maybe they want you to do reviews for OS 9 games.
 
posted by alec
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Grow up.
 
I know that sounds combative and insulting, but it is intended to be neither, and is probably the most productive comment youll receive.
 
Im simply reacting to what sounds like a need for better coping skills, and to adapt to and see the positives in change. As it is your cheese has been moved  to reference a terribly overused meme, so youre feeling vulnerable and negative about everything around you. In many ways this almost reads like the first letter home from summer camp, when everything stinks and is yucky and everyone is mean and cant you come and pick me up mom?
 
Did you ever go away to summer camp? Did you go away for university?
 
Of course, empire-building asshat IT departments and policies are an epic annoyance in this industry. Theyre basically a set of policies built around keeping Timmy the gator in sales from opening viruses disguised an porn email, but theyre a major pain in the ass for people who know what theyre doing.
 
posted by Dennis Forbes
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Youre a ginormous pussy.
 
posted by Josh
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
This is why Microsoft gives every engineer their own office, with four walls and a door that closes
 
posted by Stuart
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Get out of there ASAP.
 
posted by Frank
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
That sounds like a horrible ennvironment to work in, Im surprised Wired works that way, they always sound so happy and friendly
 
posted by Ryan
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Talk about biting the hand that feeds.  What has it been, a whole week?
 
If youre miserable in the office, fucking fix it.  Work from home, work nights, quit, whatever.  I am quite certain you could solve this problem without  publicly dissing your new employer.  And more importantly, without making life difficult for your (presumed) friends who got you this gig in the first place.
 
By all means fix your problem.  Show a little consideration for someone other than yourself while youre at it.
 
posted by Matt C
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Hello,
 
Ive been a IT consultant for over 10 years now.  In that time Ive had to catch flights in snowstorms, been shoved in corners and tiny ridiculous cubicles by clients.  Been treated like subclass dirt by full time employees of clients.  Stood at White Plains airport for 2 hours every Friday night waiting for a flight to chicago.  Been under enormous deadline pressure under impossible circumstances created by clueless project managers.
 
And your issue is that your sofa office in San Francisco has white noise?
 
Toughen up, youre soft. I hope you invest your money wisely because if you have to get a real job you aint seen nothing yet!
 
posted by Jim
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Nobody has spit on you at work yet? Sounds like an above average office in San Francisco.
 
posted by confused
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Speaking from experience of being stuck in a situation like that for 2 years before an Office Space/The Office marathon made me aware of it.
 
Get out NOW.
 
It took over a year of time off to get back to normal productivity. Environments like that drain your life and creativity, and even now Im much more reluctant to start new ideas I have.
 
I thought I could change the place for colleagues and I, but months of meetings and having suggestions shot down completely kills your self esteem. Then you start wondering if youre the only one who notices how messed up the environment youre in is.
All other co-workers seem content to be given even the slightest amount of freedom from monotony, akin to a caged pet being delighted at the chance to run free for 5 minutes per week.
 
The worst part is that you dont notice it changing you until its too late. When you find yourself attending corporate productivity getaways or customer service seminars and thinking that theyre a great motivation to keep working for a few months longer.
 
By the time I left, it took me 1 solid week to clear out and delegate all the email or work thatd built up over time, and Id spotted emails sent by friends 6 months earlier asking if I wanted to catch up over the weekend.
You find yourself attending work sponsored parties where everyone is asking everyone else What do you do for a living?, then seeing the blank stare of apathy on their faces as they pretend to care, much like you pretend to care how well their department is doing.
 
Id better stop here, as all the horrible memories are gushing back and making me ask myself Why didnt I leave on the first day after training like one of the other guys did?.
 
Heed my warning, get out before it really starts to change you, and you live your life one weekend at a time.
 
posted by K
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
And Paul helped you to get here?  How ironic.
 
posted by Nick D
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Oh, and anyone who tells you to get over it or be a man is deluding themselves into thinking that this is what life is supposed to be like.
 
I sincerely hope that you didnt sign a contract giving your employer intellectual property ownership of anything you create while working there, as I did.
 
Corporate environments like that only exist because everyone is busy telling each other that this is how its supposed to be in the 21st century, instead of being smart and leaving.
 
If you stay, you will regret it.
 
posted by K
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Oh, and anyone who tells you to get over it or be a man is deluding themselves into thinking that this is what life is supposed to be like.
 
or perhaps theyre thinking that maybe people should communicate and try to change things.
 
posted by matt m.
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Re what Dennis Forbes said.
 
I dont believe this is a question of growing up. Anyone who thinks that is being condescending, even though they may think it is good advice.
 
To those who suggested work arounds for Exchange: snicker, sigh! Thats just a symptom  the disease is systemic and unwinnable  organizational lupus.
 
Speak to Paul. I am sure he would be distressed at your situation and would recommend some exits. After all, the idea from at least one of his essays was how to deliver superb value/wealth to the world and retire from the workaday misery of ordinary folk who spend a lifetime delivering close to zilch value in an office-space environment.
 
Especially when you have so many better things to do. Youre a good writer and (I am sure) programmer. There are hundreds of problems to be solved out there, millions of other things to do.
 
Dont sell yourself short. Jeez, youd have a better office environment in Microsoft, where you can bring your apple laptop to work.
 
To those who think youre making life tough for your co-workers etc.  get over it! This is not a personal attack on Wired. If a problem exists, the first thing a hacker does is acknowledge it, instead of hiding behind management-speak.
 
Show your manager the Parable of the Developer and ESRs managing hackers article. If he doesnt get it, refuse to fill in the peoplesoft timesheet. What, its not like you need the money that bad, and a little passive resistance wont hurt (unless youre at UCLA). Turn up to work as usual, just refuse to jump through the bureaucratic hoops.
 
Theyll let you work from home rather than deal with the aggravating holes youre causing in daily/weekly reports.
 
This is a classic test of PGs assertions that large companies can outsource innovation  that much is true, but perhaps he should write a follow-up on how small companies can survive once bought out.
 
PG and you both see the problem clearly enough. Now its time to hack a solution!
 
And cheer up! Remember you can walk away anytime you want. Reddit can be the throw-away first project, you have much more within you!
 
posted by notso anonymouse
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I too have experience with the bike rides (my usual transport to work) and the corporate drudgery.  The good news is that the place has a shower so I can change after the ride.  The bad news is best described by you, Aaron.
 
I dont know why corporate knowledge applications are so often big balls of sucktitude.  Its impossible to find anything, and theyre generally so slow!  It seems that theres gotta be a market for (wince) Web 2.0 business apps of this nature, where that trite term means doesnt suck.
 
Your description, Aaron, is why the founders leave after they get bought outand start something else.  It just happens.
 
posted by Rich
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I usually put it on these terms:
 
Is your situation worse than someone selling their body on the street for crack?
 
If not, its really not that bad.
 
posted by Robert S
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I dont believe this is a question of growing up. Anyone who thinks that is being condescending, even though they may think it is good advice.
 
Let Aaron revisit it in 5 years and see if it really was so bad (so bad that in half a day he was distraught in a bathroom).
 
And to those thinking that this means suck it up and take it, because this is the feces that is real life, let me assure you that would be entirely missing the point. The point is rather that right now it seems like Aaron is only seeing the negative side of everything, and hes blind to all of the positives, which is a typical who moved my cheese kind of reaction. Give him time.
 
posted by Dennis Forbes
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
A thought experiment that might help - if you started a new venture at this new place, would/could it be as good and successful as reddit? Why/ why not? What does the answer tell you?
 
posted by Rikard Linde
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
posted by matt.m: or perhaps theyre thinking that maybe people should communicate and try to change things.
 
Or perhaps you didnt read my original post, where I spent 2 years communicating and trying to change things at the corporation I worked at, which was also not as bad as the conditions Aaron has mentioned being in.
Sure, you could waste 2 years of your life trying to slay the corporate Hydra like I did, as matt m. suggests.
 
posted by K
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
The way we work is changing I feel the same as Aaron. I only realized it after this post.
 
posted by David Smit
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
didnt paul graham give you any REAL advice about what you do when you are acquired?
 
dude. this is what you do. you come in between 10 and 11am, surf the web until 2 or 3, then leave. dont even show up on fridays. for kicks, you could be like winamp when they got acquired by AOL, and actively try to destroy the company from within (with a lot of success, I was there)
 
posted by chompy omega
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
My advise, to you and all others in similar plight, invest in a good set of headphones (Bose maybe) and wear a deep baseball cap for that tunnel vision. And yeah, remember to take a lot of short breaks from your computer. Sometimes the crowd around can make (ironically) you not want to leave your desk too.
 
And yeah, get a remote connection setup, so that you can work from home two three (or how many ever you can persuade your manager to agree with) number of days from work.
 
Start early to work, and dont spend a minute more than the required time. The remainder of it, work at home on GNU/Linux (or even better on a new Lisp compiler).
 
posted by Alok
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Take a holiday bro. Youve just been through an enormous amount of stress. Start-up + negotiations + buyout + move to new city = burnout. No wonder youre melting down.
 
Im an only child, a little bit aspergery and noisy offices affect me physically.  My one year at a large corporate reduced me to blubbing in bathrooms too. I hated it and will never put myself in that situation ever again. Im a hundred times more productive tele-working from my home office.
 
Take a break, kick back and sort your head out.  You need to format C the whole hard drive and set a clean system back up. It takes time to get over major events in your life and if you dont relax then youll just keep crashing.
 
If you want somewhere to totally get away from it all - come and chill with us in New Zealand. Summer is just about to kick in and it sounds like some sun & surfing would do you good. 
 
posted by Helen Baxter
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Ouch. I think the one thing that made me feel the most pity for you is the iBook with a G4 in it. And no admin access.
 
Welcome to the corporate world. I suggest you get what you can out of it and start brainstorming the next big thing. Theres lots to see and do in the Bay Area.
 
posted by Webomatica
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
Um, okay, you just accomplished something with a start-up, get a cushy job in an office in one of the most beautiful cities in the world, and oh, the white noise! How could I, super special genius man, get any kind of work done withthe white noise!!!
 
Please. We live in a world of 6 billion people. Occasionally, you have to compromise to keep things moving, but it doesnt seem like thats even your problem. You have money, talent, and most of all, options. So quit your bitching and realize that whatever your quality of life is right now, theres probably many many more people whove got worse than better.
 
posted by Dude
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
Noise canceling headphones dude.
 
posted by Kevin A. Burton
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
White noise often kills me too. A really simple suggestion: ear plugs. They look ridiculous, but some days they save my sanity. I have big red and black industrial strength ear-muff style ones which work amazingly at stopping the noise. I dont often wear these in public though, and they can be hot at times. Industrial strength small foam plugs are also extremely good and unobtrusive. I use these most often at the office; but they make the insides of my ears itch after a while. Finally, my last line of defense is a pair of noise-canceling audio headphones. But these can be dangerous as they often come along with another sort of distraction. <-: The ones I have are in-ear buds. They work sort of. They produce their own white noise which is a bit annoying, but its of an entirely different nature: suddenly a quiet noise inside ones own head is better than the more ambient external noise. Anyhow, nice writing
 
posted by T. Middleton
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
You mention deadening white noise 3 times. I wish I worked there. It sounds like a great place to mask my 24hr/day tinnitus. Be thankful that you at least can experience silence away from work. Its been over 20 years since Ive heard silence; I think Ive forgotten what it sounds like.
 
posted by Gregg
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
Hey, here is how I solve the problem: http://tinyurl.com/ylr6rm
If they object - then take the hint and LEAVE!
 
Good luck and keep blogging!
 
posted by Richard Freytag
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
wow, you touched a nerve, too, judging by all the comments.
i wonder how the wired people who stopped by to talk to you feel about all of this.is there any chance they were trying to welcome you? in my time in IT i have mostly tried to help the poepl i support.and it is my job, not my entire personality. sorry you are unhappy, but i think you were a little rough on some folk.
 
posted by jeremy w
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
I cant get anything done in offices either. And I would never work somewhere that told me what software to run. (didnt you discuss that when you agreed to work there?)
 
Get yourself some Shure e2cs and all youll hear is music. (or e5cs if you dont care about the price)
 
posted by Gerald Oskoboiny
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
I have heard that Tibetan Monks will use white noise as an exercise to deepen their ability to meditate.
 
Life: Its all about controlling your mind.
 
Youre NOT going crazy youre being tested.
 
You did make me much happier with my cube environment.
 
Endure work and start creating a side project at home in a closet with 3 other cool nerds.
 
posted by 
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
I absolutely sympathize with your plight.  Working in a corporate office is absolute drudgery.  By the way, Exchange has a web mail interface, so there really isnt a reason you have to use Outlook (or Entourage) 100% of the time.
 
posted by Carl
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
Exchange also has POP/SMTP interfaces, if IT has enabled them.
 
Also, let me sum up your new work environment:
* Shared office with only 1? other person
* Window office
* Has a couch
* Friendly, outgoing coworkers
 
Sounds awful!
 
Also: if you can somehow manage to get the local administrator password, do it. IT usually doesnt care if you install stuff/generally mess with your own computer, they just dont want to support it when it breaks. But YMMV, and they may be really security-crazy and fire you and press charges. Who knows.
 
I couldnt survive without admin access on my machine.
 
posted by Peter
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
Cant stop posting to this thread:-) 
Aaron, either you deal with the symtoms of the problem, white noise, CN choosing what computer you use etcetera. These symtoms will never disappear if you dont do what I recommend - deal with the root cause. The actual problem is the question of power. What things should CN decide about and what should you decide about? The answer should be based on an assessment of what will yield the best result.
 
posted by Rikard Linde
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
Well, youve got the spectrum of replies from toughen up to quit.  I find too many people suck it up (and become bitter old people - In my day my boss treated us like slaves.  Be happy you get a choice about lunch.), and when I see someone that doesnt accept that, I applaud.  Honestly, its the uncommon position to take, and because of that you generally have be of stronger will than those who suck it up and think theyre the tough ones.
 
As one of the successful ones, or so I presume, you have to put your foot down for all those who cant (wont actually).  Whos gonna make the situation better if everyone just sucks it up?  Now, maybe you suck it up for a short time, a couple months, but any longer and youre joining the line of suckers who are too afraid of real change (unless your goal your own Dilbert comic).  Sometimes it can be done on the inside, and its a personal question if you really want to be that person because it takes a lot of time and effort the larger more established a company is.
 
I say let the companies compete.  If you arent willing to use the power you have as an employee, that being quitting and going someplace else, then companies wont ever have to really compete for employees.  Competition has a great way of equalizing the field, especially if you can find a competitor that treats you better and in turn competes better.  Dont be pressured into accepting unhappy conditions because others were pressured into unhappiness themselves.
 
posted by MyNameIsMatt
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
Cond Nast/Wired is full of journalists/graphic artists/photographers.  They do not have any programmers.  They are clueless about how to handle programmers.   This is typified by them taking away your computers and giving you G4s and when you told them you needed to install programs, they said, Dont worry, we can get you Photoshop.
 
Hey, they need to be educated on the care and feeding of programmers.  Now presumably they bought reddit because they saw some value in it and in you guys; there is some reason they want you aroundthey want your expertise and they need your help to build these sub-reddits for their magazines.
 
So you have to go to Kourosh and educate him on what programmers needwhat hours they work (not 9-5), what kind of office space they can tolerate (not white noise and pink walls; maybe not in the Wired office at all); how they need root access, etc.; how they cant work with Big Brother looking over their shoulders every moment.  If he wants you to be productive for the company and meet your goals, then he should be willing to arrange those exceptions for you (if you explain them clearly).  If not, then you guys arent going to produce much of anything.  Thats just the way its going to work under the current conditionsat least if Steve (and Alexis in NY) is as discombobulated as you seem to be.  Try not to be so stressed out; youll just make yourself sick.
 
posted by The Mom
 on November 18, 2006 #
 
Wired has tried to make the offices look exciting by painting the walls bright pink but the gray office monotony sneaks through all the same. Gray walls, gray desks, gray noise. The first day I showed up here, I simply couldnt take it. By lunch time I had literally locked myself in a bathroom stall and started crying.
 
Dude you are a whiny-ass bitch. Jesus Christ, get a grip.
 
posted by Rockwell
 on November 19, 2006 #
 
I gave this some more thought, and Im 95% convinced this is some sort of performance art/TheOnion-type spoof, so, apologies if Im the one not in on the joke.
 
posted by Rockwell
 on November 19, 2006 #
 
yo interesting post,  venting  your frastration. Is tis a planned exit strategy ?? :)-
 
Being in the blackhole of large Eetrprise is like reworking a startup over again !! All pet Projects, need InsideAngels blessing and evenutally budget allocations (think VC$$).
 
Dude, its not where you are and what is happening. Its about what you are and what you want to make happen. Roll up your sleeves and begin the work. My poppy always said, the best place to find a helping hand is at the end of your own arm.
 
Dont blame the Corporation.. its just one big ivory tower, hey but you in it.. do something, do anything, get going.. NOW!! :)-
 
posted by /pd
 on November 19, 2006 #
 
Hi
 
I have had the problem of being interupted so many times that I do every thing that is difficult (requireing real thought), at home. My family knows not to disturbe me when I am in the back with my computer. So it works quite well. The only thing that they do is call me for meals, which is OK.
 
posted by Eric Hamilton
 on November 21, 2006 #
 
Ah yes the soul-killing corporate environment.
 
Actually everything people have said above is true to survive there you have to toughen up, and as Mister Road Warrior (Ive been a IT consultant for over 10 years now. In that time Ive had to hike up Mt Everest barefoot with no supplemental oxygen, survive six months in the Amazon rainforest with only a blowdart and a Berlitz In-Flight Portuguese! phrasebook etc. etc.) so eloquently put it, a lot of people in the corporate environment are pretty miserable.
 
Mainly though, I suspect the people telling you to toughen up are primarily jealous.  Presumably you got a pile of cash out of all this which is all corporate America can ever offer anyone in the way of job satisfaction  cash.
 
Look at it this way, before you were flying solo, using your wits and your instrumentation to chart the best course and survive.  Now you are sitting in business class, and the plush seat and five course snack only serve to remind you that you aint up there in the pilots (or co-pilots) seat no more.  Which sucks, yes, but dont expect the poor bastards crammed in behind you stuffed nose to ass in the economy cattle class to give much of a fuck.  Similarly, dont expect the fat cats ahead of you in first class to understand your pain either, as none of them are interested in getting behind the controls of the plane and frankly dont give two shits where the plane goes, as long as their fat asses are well-cushioned, their gullets well-fed, and their egos well-coddled along the way.
 
So you might as well sit back, relax, and enjoy the rest of your flight or if you decide to jump out, make sure you strap on a parachute and take enough cash to go buy another airplane.
 
Just my two cents, best of luck to you, whoever you are, I just happened to see this and your anguish touched a chord.  Regardless of what anyone says, the first day in the office sucks monkey ass and frankly the most natural reaction in the world to such an environment is to lock yourself in the bathroom and hide.  I clearly remember my first day in the Corporate World.  I went home with a splitting headache and and with every sense numbed, feeling something had been taken from me and I didnt even know what it was.
 
Fear not.. you have the skills to survive on The Outside and you have demonstrated to yourself what you can do.  Take your time, collect your wits, and plot your next move.
 
posted by former drone
 on December 23, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 14, 2006
 
Title: The Existential Terror of San Francisco
 
After I sold my company I decided to visit New York City one time before I moved out to San Francisco. The trip was a lot of fun, but at one point I found myself completely out of cash, my ATM/debit card snapped in half, my credit card deactivated for suspected fraud, and my phone out of batteries. Then I got off at the wrong subway stop and found myself deep in the wrong part of Harlem.
 
As scary as that was, it wasnt anywhere near as frightening as the existential terror I feel every day walking the streets of San Francisco.
 
When I walked through the streets of Manhattan, I saw residents going for a stroll or walking their dog or playing with their kids and I thought Ah, I could live here. But even while Im living in San Francisco I still cant quite believe it can be done. I saw a mother out walking with her daughter and thought What are you doing?! Dont you know this is no place for a child?
 
The whole city feels like some sort of movie set; oversized and fake. Every time I go out I worry that I might miss my mark or fumble my lines and on the rare occasions that I do, I am mercilessly excoriated by the city officials. When New Yorkers bark at you for screwing up, its because theyre impatient. But San Franciscans seem to do it much more frequently and with much more emotion. Youre not just wasting my time, their tone of voice says, youre insulting me with your stupidity.
 
Ive been to San Francisco before, of course, but always on very carefully planned excursions. Go to this place, take this subway, get off here. I realized after I moved here that this was the first day Id really woken up in the city and it was terrifying. I ran down the street to catch my train to work and (after getting barked at by city employees for waiting in the wrong place) found the train packed to the edges, with barely enough space for me to stand.
 
The city maltreats you even when youre not doing anything wrong. I tried to take a bus from the place I was staying to downtown one night and, after everyone else got off at earlier stops, the bus driver noticed I was the only one left in the bus and kicked me out before hed finished the route. Yeah, this is the last stop now, he said. Get out.
 
Of course the downtown district is a den of filth and vice, shops with names like Tenderloin Liquors and Adult Show Superstore with gangs of leering indigents sitting on every streetcorner. In Harlem, people mostly kept their eyes down and kept walking. Here everyone calls out to me, like a dark postapocalyptic scene from Blade Runner or A.I..
 
Of course, San Francisco isnt all pain. Every time I begin to think its too much to bear and that I have to get out of town now, it does some little thing to redeem itself. Im spit on by every drunk and transit worker, rained on from the entirely cloud-covered sky, splashed on by the busses refusing to follow their routes, but then Im wonderfully treated by the staff of the soaring San Francisco Library and then Im cheerful again until the next guy spits in my face.
 
One night, the friend Im staying with invited me to go with her to San Franciscos Midnight Riders and lent me a bike to do so. The bike was a road bike, which I didnt know how to use, and I didnt have a helmet. We sped down hills as I peddled furiously and met up with a group of drunk people (some of whom were also on cocaine) carrying axes (the theme was I Married an Axe Murderer) as we sped around the city, culminating at the pier, where some of them stripped down and jumped into the freezing water.
 
After that terrifying night, San Francisco didnt really scare me anymore, but it still felt wrong. Perhaps a movie set is a fairly safe place to actually be, but when you live on-stage its difficult to get any privacy. Having to live my life on stage in this dark, cartoony, mask-filled world seems like a more terrifying nightmare than anything an axe-wielding gang of cocaine-high bikers could do.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 14, 2006
 
Go to Green Apple and take a rest at Red A? bakery cafe. Its a place like no other.
 
posted by gag
 on November 14, 2006 #
 
I know plenty of people who felt their existence threatened most of the time in NYC but are for the most part happy in the crappier parts of the Mission. Maybe you look too friendly/peaceful and get grief because of that?
 
I also think most cities suck when you first move to them.
 
Kudos for publicly declaring that SF isnt perfect. Most people are too hip to do that.
 
posted by Dan Stowell
 on November 14, 2006 #
 
Well Aaron, now weve completely traded places. Since I spend a lot of my time wistfully remembering the good things about San Francisco, and harping on Boston, it helps to be reminded of some of the negatives.  Its true that San Francisco has an attitude problem. Big time. I cant say that the angry Massholes I occasionally run into are much of a delight, but the psychological dysfunctions of San Francisco do seem more universal and widespread.
 
posted by Daniel Jalkut
 on November 14, 2006 #
 
My recommendation would be to hang out around the nice parks: Dolores, Duboce, Alamo Square. Im sitting in Duboce Park Cafe right now and was struck by how magical this place can seem sometimes (and not in the movie-magic sense). Id also have to say that any event involving more than 4 people on bikes is asking for disaster. Ive never lived in NY, but based on what other people tell me, its far far less livable than SF. I second what danny-dan said about this place not being perfect, but I cant really imagine a better place (at least in the US) to be.
 
posted by Mikeymike
 on November 14, 2006 #
 
Since you liked Boston critical mass so much, you should try SF critical mass.  I havent been, but I hear nothing but good things about it.  (well, except for bad things that you wouldnt consider bad  because if you did, you wouldnt have enjoyed Boston critical mass either).
 
posted by Mark
 on November 14, 2006 #
 
It sounds like you hang out around the tenderloin and on market around 6th st, which are about the worst parts of the city outside of bayview.  As dannydan said I spent the better part of last year a stones throw away from those parts on shotwell st.  Walking home at night it was like night of living dead, with everyone stumbling around on crack.  But there were also mothers and babies, mostly hispanic, which [should] make one realize that many people are not fortunate enough to choose their surroundings.
 
Anyway, you might just not be a city person.  Most people I know that spent any time there hated palo alto, and spent every waking moment wishing they were in the city.  As a suburban kid myself, I find the experience of living in a neighborhood where everyone has Bush/Cheney signs on their lawns and enjoys their walled-up all-white exurb to be terrifying itself.  But thats just me.
 
Btw, if you think San Francisco is bad I really dont think youd like brooklyn, where the liquor stores are seedier AND the cocaine bikers more pretentious.  In fact, as Dave Chapelle has noted, a quick BART trip to oaktown might give you a fresh perspective on your sf environs.
 
posted by am
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
Can I get a what what!(?)
 
Ameeth: we should invite this guy to poker.
 
posted by Mikeymike
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
tortured-psyche fiction piece?
 
posted by confused
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
Aaron  While I enjoy your posts, I feel like you overintellectualize many issues.
 
I would have to agree with the prior commenter. This feels like pure fiction to me  a desire to have a nice blog post thats written like fiction. Come on, how many people really spit on you? Ive lived here for 18 years and its never happened once.
 
It feels like you were on the hunt for interesting material to make this post engaging.
 
It feels like you were writing this post while walking around instead of living there in the moment.
 
Food for thought.
 
posted by Ben Casnocha
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
Aaron, where in the world are you living? Ill certainly agree that the Tenderloin is unpleasant, bus drivers sometimes mean (and sometimes surprisingly nice), and the SF attitude annoying in different ways from Mass-holes, but I cant express how easy it is to avoid the nastier parts of the city in favor of the beautiful, warm parts.
 
[Subtext: You should have moved in early Sept., so you would have had two months of beautiful weather to move in with]
 
Have you spent much time in the parks? I quite like Duboce and Golden Gate, of course, both of which are easy to get to on the N-line [dont even get me started on how much better the Muni is that the T].
 
If youre looking for streets without hookers, try anywhere west of Market other than the loin. In particular, Id expect that youd find the Inner Sunset (9th street, really) quite reminiscent of Porter/Davis.
 
posted by Keith Fahlgren
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
Of course there are millions of stories in the naked city  all of them different.   San Francisco is small  not a giant behemoth like NY  it is scaled to a single humans size  you can walk in one day from one end to the other  try it, youll love it.  Start downtown  go down Market street  turn down Height to Golden Gate Park  walk through the park to the beech  spend some time at the museum or One Dog Night, if its still there  walk back  or take your sleeping bag and sleep in the park or on the beech.  Next time go the other direction  out Stockton  spend some time in upper Grant Avenue  through China Town to Fishermans Wharf  dont be afraid of the street  nobody is going to hurt you.  San Francisco is a town small enough to swallow  almost whole  bond with it.  If you look at it straight on, with no tremble in your eye, what you see will be a surprising contrast to the awful isolation of suburbia.  Like NY, San Francisco is alive, yet still small enough for a single man to thoroughly tread with his two feet  or at least it was a couple decades ago.    Btw, congrats on reddit.
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
This is of course too little, too late, but its nicer in Oakland. Try the Lake Merritt area.
 
posted by misuba
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
you became a millionaire and now work in a cube in SOMA and live in an apartment in the Loin?  WTF??
 
anyway. SF is way better than Cambridge, at least you have real crazy people instead of a bunch of fake academics and lame college students.
 
However, the market street corridor and the tenderloin truly are scenes from 28 Days Later maybe you should just move to a nicer part of town. noe valley, cole valley, alamo square, etc.
 
posted by chupacabra
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Hi Aaron,
 
Ive been to SF before and I know how you feel.  A lot of my friends live in the East Bay and take Bart over to SF for their jobs.  Anyway, if youre not too keen on living in SF, maybe head over to the East Bay and check things out.  Albany, El Cerrito and Berkeley are all pretty mellow compared to SF.  Ive lived in the Berkeley area for about 10 years and I really like the atmosphere that comes with being close to a University.
 
On a completely different note, if you get a chance, you should try watchingHaibane RenmeiI think you might dig it.
 
Anyway, good luck with your new job. If things get really crappy, just quit and go to school at Cal.    :-)
 
Regards,
Steven
 
posted by Steven
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
Although I understand the different reaction to both cities, I find SFO orders of magnitude a much more congenial city than NYC: IN SFO you naturally flock to people with similar ideas, people are friendly even when confrontational, and although no supermodels (as in NYC), it also means fewer supermodels. Yeah, that is a bummer.
NYC was always hostile, always fake and trying to show off. SFO can not be more boring with all its political correctness, but it has all this brainy weight to it that enamors me to it.
Although, I must say, SFO is always thinking about its next Big Earthquake. Now that is its existential terror.
 
posted by Camilo
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
San Francisco is not the place for anyone to live if you plan on having a family anytime soon. its great if you are single but then again SF is becoming more single every year as well as more unfriendly to families. i suspect a lot of this has to do with the overwhelming general perverseness, homosexual and immoral culture that is seeping into every corner of the city and this includes everyone in the judicial system there.
 
Now, not even innocent little kids and their parents can make up their own mind as to joining Junior ROTC. i could write a book about how wacky the whole political and cultural landscape is there but i dont need to since many have already talked and written about it.
 
posted by SFO
 on November 16, 2006 #
 
I walk through the Tenderloin every morning on my way to the work shuttle. Its generally the worst part of my day. I hope your lease is short because I think you should consider finding a better neighborhood.
 
If you are working in Soma, consider living in North Beach or the Haight or the inner sunset or inner richmond. Heck, I like the Richmond district so much that I bought a house there but its hard to see my friends who live in the Mission because cross-town transit is poor here.
 
Generally, anywhere thats less than 20 minutes downtown by Muni/BART would probably work out better than living in the TL.
 
posted by Steve Jenson
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
Yeah, SF can be full of self-appointed officials who want to tell you what to do and how to do it. I remember one encounter with the Cool Police back when I lived in the Lower Haight in about 1992. I was walking home one evening, returning from a job interview, wearing khaki pants and a white shirt. About a half block from my flat, a teenage punk in a spiky mohawk grabbed me and said, you cant walk down this street dressed like THAT, youll get killed! Yeah right. I told him I LIVE on this street, do YOU? What I should have said was, hey that mohawk was really cool.. back in 1977 when I had one.
 
posted by Charles
 on November 17, 2006 #
 
Youre insane. Youre also probably projecting your own insecurities onto the city around you. Ive lived, worked, or partied here for all of the past ten years, and my own experience was that when SF was unfamiliar, it was chaotic, beautiful, and endlessly inviting. When it grew familiar, it did so like an old glove.
 
The Tenderloin is indeed a dump of epic concentration, but its just a few square blocks, surrounded by perfectly acceptable (and even quite posh) neighborhoods on all sides, and home to some of the best indian & south asian food Ive ever had.
 
posted by Michal Migurski
 on November 18, 2006 #
 
m.migurski 
 
if your post was directed towards me then ill have to respectfully disagree and for you or anyone in here to tell me when or where i am wrong when i say SF is becoming less family friendly and more focused on singles and more specifically gays.
 
look i am not a gay basher but i am not blind either. get with the program. SF is different than any other city ive been to or lived in and not in a good way.
 
posted by SFO
 on November 20, 2006 #
 
@SFO - the comment definitely wasnt directed at you at all. I think what youre bringing up is unrelated to Aarons terror. A terrifying city isnt family friendly, but an unterrifying city isnt necessarily family UNfriendly either. =)
 
I dont know if SFO is family unfriendly. I have friends happily bringing up kids here, and the weekday afternoon latte-toting Noe Valley mom with stroller and golden retriever in tow is a familiar cliche, so someone must think its a good idea. Obviously if youre the kind of person who thinks that all gays and singles are immoral perverts, then youre going to prefer the family-friendliness of a Walnut Creek ranch home and a two hour commute. ;)
 
posted by Michal Migurski
 on November 20, 2006 #
 
Er, an unterrifying city isnt necessarily family friendly either. Damn contrapositives.
 
posted by Michal Migurski
 on November 20, 2006 #
 
(quote)Your favorite city sucks.(unquote)  There, its been said.
 
Aaron, you remind me of my suburban friends who used to tell me how awful New York was.  When I asked them how on earth they got that impression, the answer was always the same: well, I drove into Manhattan, and [insert horrible car-related story here].  Taking public transportation in San Francisco is asking for pain.  Those of us from real cities who moved here have learned to love it despite that flaw.  Ive lived here 14 years and can hardly imagine living anywhere else.
 
In time youll come to see the error of your ways: either youll lighten up and start enjoying the good life, or youll get fed up and leave.  No biggie either way.  But thanks for the funny and entertaining flashback to the culture shock I felt in my first few months in town!  Really takes me back.  Ah, to be young again.
 
posted by Cassidy
 on November 21, 2006 #
 
You are polarized. You will attract what you feel because that is how these things are. Instead of having a bad thing happen and putting it behind you, you dwell on it and it attracts more, which attracts more, ad infinitum. It works both ways, expect good and it will happen. BTW, I was with Midnight Riders, and you, and they are what you paint as some sort of gang from The Warriors. Kids having fun, drinking, not on coke. They had paper axes for spoke cards and learned the song from So I Married an Axe Murderer so they could do a jig. It was harmless fun with some skinny dipping. Loosen up and allow the world around you to be itself and see the good and fun in it. It will despise you if you despise it. It will love you if- oh hell, whats the Golden Rule?
 
posted by PDX
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
I meant that they arent some sort of gangoops.
 
posted by PDX
 on December 27, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 13, 2006
 
Title: Meeting Peter Singer
 
I remember watching an episode of Penn & Teller about animal rights. As usual, the show mostly consisted of a long series of clips relating to animal rights, followed by comments from Penn making fun of the idea. This show, I recall, was particularly weak. They didnt even pretend to make an argument; it was entirely mockery.
 
Watching this, I couldnt help but realize there was a powerful logical argument at the core of the animal rights groups: animals should be treated much the same way humans are  their lives should be respected, their pain minimized, etc. Make this one simple change to your system of morality and everything else falls into place. PETA actually seems kind of measured when they refer to the Holocaust on your plate.
 
Peter Singer is the moral philosopher who has probably done the most to promote this idea. With a wide-ranging career spanning from Marx to meat, his book Animal Liberation, which quietly and thoughtfully makes this case, is widely-regarded as launching the animal liberation movement.
 
I was recently dragged to the Boston Vegetarian Festival to see Singer speak about his new book, The Way We Eat, and was deeply impressed by his thoughtfulness and clarity of mind. An aging fellow with thoughtful glasses, he looks like Noam Chomsky, another plainspoken professor. He is not a passionate activist who has taken on the cause of animals, but simply what he appears: a moral philosopher who started thinking about the issue one day and drew the logical conclusions.
 
After his talk, a woman in the audience asked a question about the rumors that he would sometimes eat non-vegan food. The audience was scandalized. Let me address that, Singer said. I dont believe in veganism as a religion. I simply believe that refraining from eating animal products is the most effective way of putting pressure on producers to stop abusing and killing animals. Sometimes, if a host misunderstands my request and makes non-vegan food, instead of throwing it away, I will eat it. I dont think this is a problem, because I dont think this does any moral harm.
 
Another person asked how he could say good things about Whole Foods when they were still serving numerous animal products. Whole Foods has the best standards for animal treatment of any major organization, he replied. Thats simply a fact. And, I think its a good thing. Do I think not using animals at all would be even better? Of course. But I praise people for the good things they do and condemn them for the bad ones.
 
A final question raised the incrementalism versus revolutionism debate common to all left-wing social movements. Should one really worry about animal treatment when the animals were still going to be killed? Pinger said the answer was undoubtedly yes. Look, I thought that when Animal Liberation came out everyone would read it and become a vegan. But its been thirty years and vegans are still less than 10% of the population. If you genuinely care about animal suffering, you have to admit that, and say, what else can we do to ease animal suffering?
 
After Singers talk, I began thinking through the consequences of his morality. A question occurred to me: Should we also stop animals from eating each other? I was sure others had made such arguments as reductio ad absurdums of vegetarianism, but I thought I might be the first to be genuinely interested in it from a moral perspective.
 
Of course not, said my friend. Its not our fault if the animals kill each other. You mean, I said, that you think its perfectly moral to let that guy  I pointed at a random guy nearby  go around killing people? Well, OK, he said. But its different with animals, because they dont know any better. You mean it would be OK to let him go around killing people if he was mentally ill and didnt realize he was doing it? You should go ask Singer, he said.
 
So I did  he was signing books outside the lecture hall and as the line ended I asked him my question. His answer was even better than I imagined: We would if we knew how to do so without making things worse and disturbing the ecosystems and so on. Thanks! I said, impressed. He spied the large white book I was hugging to my chest. Are you reading Kolakowski? he asked. Yep, I said smiling. Had to read that when I was studying Marx a long time ago. Its heavy, he said. Quite literally! I replied, hefting the 1200 page book. He smiled.
 
I have to say, though, I said, feeling guilty, that I dont agree with your Darwinian Left stuff. Thats OK, he replied. You dont need to agree with everything I write. Then he wandered off, looking for the next thing to see.
 
I had to get that off my chest, because it was the one thing bugging me about Singer. Somehow later in life Singer had become a sociobiologist, one of that vulgar group of psuedoscientists who insist  despite all evidence  that humans are genetically programmed to do all everything a right-wing politician could imagine. (Sociobiology having gotten a bad name, they now call themselves evolutionary psychologists.)
 
In his book A Darwinian Left, however, Singer explains that this is no reason for the left to despair. If people are actually born stupid, thats only more justification for left-wing policies. We need to provide the stupid people with the extra resources to live on equal terms as the smart people. Steven Pinker cites this book (along with Singers The Expanding Circle) several times in his execrable Blank Slate to prove that his noxious views arent necessarily right-wing. (Neither Pinker nor Singer, of course, provide any real evidence to show this actually is the way humans are.)
 
That said, as usual Singers conclusions do follow from his premises  if you do make that one small change to the way you think the world works, then his conclusions about what we should do to remedy it undoubtedly follow. I just wish hed check his assumptions.
 
That aside, it seems unfair to dismiss Singer on the basis of a small blemish on an incredibly long and varied career  Wikipedia lists over forty books hes written or co-authored. His thoughtfulness and clarity in sharing it is an example to us all.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 13, 2006
 
Whats wrong with evolutionary biologists? I assume that all theyre saying is that certain immoral behaviors are also characteristics likely to get passed on to young. I really dont see how its any different to say Humans can be irrationally jealous about sex because irrationally jealous humans tend to have more children, than it is to say Cats have sharp claws because sharp-clawed cats can kill more mice and thus are more likely to breed.
 
I think the exact term for Singers dietary ideology is Meagan.
 
posted by Byrne Hobart
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
Evolutionary psychologists say quite a bit more than that, but lets just stick to that example. Its nice to sit and make up stories about how cats got their claws (Rudyard Kipling has a nice book called Just-So Stories about how the leopard got his spots and so on). But this is childrens book writing, not science, which would require some evidence. Evolutionary psychologists just come up with stories to explain why theyre jealous without even bothering to look into whether everyone is just like them. Thats just propaganda.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
Im jealous. If I still lived in Cambridge, I definitely wouldve like to have met him. Just last week I was discussing various theories of altruism and was drawing increasingly large circles around the self, kin, tribe, nation, etc., with respect to social parochialism and drew the largest expanding circle to include Singers arguments for animals.
 
I always appreciated his consistency in argument, and his pragmatism. If I remember correctly, the interaction on veganism is much like his position on vivisection. While it might be immoral to experiment on animals, that shouldnt prevent us from improving the protocols for animal experimentation while it is done (i.e., Britain is much better at this than in the U.S.) Here, all you have to do is allude to cancer and you can torture animals regardless of efficacy.
 
posted by Joseph Reagle
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
Oh, I see. Your problem is with the data theyre trying to explain, rather than with the explanation itself, then? Im not sure: I think their argument goes something like this:
 
1) Some people will lie/cheat/steal/rape/etc. if they can get away with it.
 
2) Some of them get away with it.
 
3) Those who get away with it expend less effort for the same amount of food/shelter/progeny.
 
4) Their progeny are more likely than the rest of the population to inherit these antisocial tendencies (whether through genes or memes).
 
5) More kids due to trait + kids more likely to have trait is the classic Darwinian recipe for proliferation of a trait.
 
Its fair to say that traits exist and can be handed down from parents even if these traits dont exist for everyone and dont always get handed down: Evolutionary biology is useful if theres correlation, even if it isnt 100%.
 
posted by Byrne Hobart
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
And maybe people in San Francisco pee on doorsteps because the doorsteps remind them of the bathroom holes their hominid ancestors used. Without evidence, this kind of thing is just armchair wankery, not science. You can make up any such story to explain any such thing you like.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
This is the best I can come up with for Liberalism from First Principals:
 
0) You (a human) have been sold 10,000 ideas about how to be happy, and how to avoid negative judgment.  Push back against them all, and notice most fall away with absolutely no substance.
 
1) There is a high probability that you can be happy and healthy, and still have enough time, energy, and resources to do meaningful work for any cause you wish, because of the freedom you gained from pushing back (in step zero).
 
2) Pushing back against insubstantial ideas about happiness and avoiding negative judgment is not consistent with any particular progressive cause, but is definitely inconsistent with working slavishly to preserve the current human power structure.
 
I wish I could wave a magic wand and create pervasive tolerance among, between, and throughout all people who are disinterested in working slavishly to preserve the current human power structure.
 
Conservatives are typically marked by cohesion and tolerance among members of their own group, and progressives are typically marked by incohesion and intolerance among members of their own group.
 
My guess is that a progressive, tolerant of all other progressives, is a politically unexploitable creature.  So it is attacked from all sides with no fear of reprisal: attacked either for fun, sport, or for purpose.
 
I am interested in the necessary and sufficient conditions for human politics to arise.  What sources would you suggest for researching this?
 
posted by manuelg
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
Its only armchair wankery if it doesnt provide a viable answer to an existing question. Evolutionary psychology hypothesizes an answer to the question of why people have an inclination to do bad things; we can (probably) test it by comparing the honesty of people across different cultures. If its found to be valid (Im not an expert  perhaps its been confirmed, perhaps not), well have evidence that people will tend to be more moral in the future if theyre compelled to be more moral now.
 
posted by Byrne Hobart
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
Unless you consider natural selection a powerful enough theory that, for a given feature in nature, there almost must be an adaptation explanation for it (our ability to discern anything whatsoever from fossils depends on this assumption, so I assume youll buy it). Then just-so stories, if they are falsifiable, are simply theories. Thinking up theories isnt wankery, is it? Generally you think of a theory, think of some predictions, and then go test it, no?
 
Going back to animal rights: I am not convinced that everything with a nervous system places an ethical burden upon us. What is your justification for this premise?
 
posted by David McCabe
 on November 14, 2006 #
 
I dont think any scientist believes every trait is adaptive. There is also exaptation and pure randomness.
 
But the bigger problem is that the evopsychers seem to think the Scientific Method includes an alert the national media phase between coming up with a hypothesis and testing it.
 
As for animal rights, I wasnt making any arguments in favor of the premise. But if you want to read some, perhaps you should get Singers Animal Liberation which many people seem to find convincing.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 14, 2006 #
 
Aaron, you dont know much about sociobiology and evolutionary psychology. Youre attacking a caricature. Go read a bunch and then if you still disagree with it you can attack it. But sociobiologists emphatically do not believe humans are genetically programmed to behave in the way you describe, and one of their first principles is avoiding just-so stories, so the fact that you attack the field for those things says to me you dont know the first thing about it.
 
I never finished Animal Liberation but I liked what I read (Im a vegan so Im entitled to skip the tedious arguments, heh). But I thought A Darwinian Left was one of the most brilliant small books Ive ever read.
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on November 14, 2006 #
 
I am interested that the objections to evolutionary biology, at least as expressed here, seem similar to fundamentalists objections to Darwinism  its just a theory, wheres the evidence, there are holes in the theory  and, as far as I can tell, for some of the same reasons, namely that it lessens the stature (in this case, moral) of humans to the nature of animals. And that the objections are being made by people who admittedly have little expertise in the subject. And that its used to further a theory  in this case, conservatism, that the objectors object to, hence its the agenda rather than the theory that seems to be in question.
 
posted by mike
 on November 14, 2006 #
 
Were talking about evolutionary psychology, not biology. Do you seriously believe Darwinism has no evidence?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
Jamie: Sorry, but Ive read an enormous amount of sociobiology and evolutionary psychology. I was trying to keep things simple for the comments here, but I know way more about this subject that I really should.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November 15, 2006 #
 
How do the glasses you wear affect the quality of your thought?
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on November 22, 2006 #
 
Animal rights drives me around the bend, so I wrote a response
here.
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on November 24, 2006 #
 
Peter Singer is a 24 karit idiot blabbering his mindless philosephies to the mind numbed zombies comming out of these failed schools and collages no wonder our collage educated kids flunk becuase their listening too much to these mindless pholosephers
 
posted by Spurwing Plover
 on October 28, 2008 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 12, 2006
 
Title: The Meaning of Borat
 
For this weeks Sunday Bonus Post, Im reprinting a note I sent to some email lists.
 
I went to see the film Borat last night. To be honest, I didnt really enjoy it as entertainment as much as I thought I would. Nevertheless, I thought I wanted to correct a common misconception.
 
A lot of people seem to think the movie is just making fun of stereotypes. Borat is a sterotypical foreigner, his victims are stereotypical Americans, and the humor comes from laughing at them. There are perhaps a couple short scenes where this might be true, but its a pretty small part of the film.
 
In reality, Borat is about the existence and enforcement of cultural norms. In place after place, Borat goes somewhere and does exactly what youre not supposed to do. By doing so, he demonstrates exactly what our cultural assumptions are, makes us laugh uncomfortably at their violation while we start to question their legitimacy, and then documents the punishment inflicted for violating them.
 
There are scenes where he questions feminist dogma, provides a brilliant critique of nationalist rhetoric, violates norms about racial integration, takes superstar-worship culture to its logical conclusion, and, in my favorite scene, deconstructs the fake niceties of the television interview (something Ive always dreamed of doing).
 
This is an incredibly tough kind of humor to do, because watching people violate cultural norms is so challenging. Were ingrained from birth with an injunction to follow the rules of behavior in such situations and violating them does not come naturally. (A Japanese friend said that watching the film was actually painful in parts.)
 
Even though, as I said, I personally didnt enjoy the film as much as I hoped, I still think that its an important project. Challenging cultural assumptions is incredibly tough. If you just criticize them outright, people think youre weird and dismiss you. And if you violate them yourselves, you suffer the social punishments. But its a very worthwhile cause; Im glad to see someone receive so much success for trying.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 12, 2006
 
Aaron. How do you have time to run a startup, write a blog, do all the other things you do, and watch movies?
 
Sincerely,
 
posted by David M.
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
Your post failed to mention why you think challenging cultural norms is an important project.
 
In a number of cases, I agree with this in principle. But you should fill in the blanks as it was your missive.
 
posted by Ron Bischof
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
Hi all,
I guess that it is time to start explaining better instead of just criticising something for free.
We all know that there is nothing free. So, if a film wants to publish a critic about something (specially if it belongs to a public culture or way of expressing) it should explain from where is that critic comming: is it from a bunch of Borgs that hate communication or all kinds of ideas that didnt come from their boss? did it origin in some traumatic experience? 
Anyway, people might buy these critics, and perhaps, for free. But what they are really buying is their own insatisfaction and insecurities. 
And after we all finish studying our reasons to laugh or talk, we might surely end laughing about the old times when we used to live spontaneously.
 
posted by chanio
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
Anthropologist Grant McCraken has two essays, where he provides similar analysis  http://www.joegrossberg.com/archives/002790.html  his remark that Borat is about boundaries was particularly salient.
 
posted by Joe Grossberg
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
Yes, lets discard all social norms  only then will the world will become a much more sensible and livable place!
 
One way to interpret peoples reaction to Bort is that theyre stupid, unimaginative dolts who deserve scorn.  Another is that theyre people confronted with one or more generally unacceptable social behaviors and try to find some more or less graceful resolution of it without creating offense.
 
In the end, its not clear to me that Bort isnt the ignoramus, albeit one whose cleverness lies in acting like a jackass for the amusement of other ignoramuses.
 
posted by Riley
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
Borats cleaverness is making us cringe about aspects of his culture, then showing us that our culture is closer to his than we think hidden behind a layer of pretence.
 
Eg.  Americans cringe at Borats fear and loathing of the Jews then Borat exposes the fact that many Americans have a similar fear and loathing of terrorists and muslims.
 
Eg.  We cringe when we hear Borat putting down women to the feminists and the American boys laugh at Borat when he falls out of love with Pamela just because shes not a virgin.
Then Borat asks why the American boy doesnt call the girls after having sex with them because I dont respect them, man!!!  Just the same, after all.  The double standards are exposedso much for men and women being equal.
 
Eg.  The Southern Society people try their best to accommodate the different culture Borat comes from. but order the black prostite out of their house.  No tolerance there!
 
posted by Lisa
 on November 24, 2006 #
 
Borat is a very disturbing film the attempts to confront the cultural issue of acceptance from the perspective of humor. For instance, the Southern dinner table scene where the dinner party was accepting of his rude comment about the Pastors wife, and the idea about eating with disabled  peope at dinner table, and even the bag full of feces. But when the issue turns to accepting Borats African American, provacativly dressed prostitute friend. The jokes over, and they are told to leave. The idea of tolerance and acceptance ring consistantly in the movie to show that many of the social norms are hippocritical and racist. Finally while chasing the socially concocted vision of beauty (pamela Anderson) Borat comes to find beauty in the darndest place. Borat makes pokes fun at he melting pot of American culture and and shows that its not really melting just mixed.
 
posted by Kat
 on December 12, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November 10, 2006
 
Title: Life at the Office
 
It started when he stopped going home. The rent in San Francisco was so
expensive and the commutes so painful that it just seemed easier not to
leave. Nobody really noticed at firstthe cleaning crew came in around
7 and just assumed he was staying late, while the other employees just
assumed he was an early riser. And really, whos going to complain about
an employee who puts in too much time at the office? Especially when he
wasnt using it to get additional work done.
 
Then he started wondering if he could eliminate the trip for food too.
He found a website that sold nutritionally-balanced diet bars and
ordered a whole tub, which he placed under his desk. All day hed be
munching on one bar or another, no longer feeling hungry around lunch or
dinner. So he just sat at his desk munching instead. Strangely, this
didnt seem to make him any more productive.
 
Between the lack of exercise and nonstop eating, he began growing fat.
Nobody really said anything to him about it. He was rail-thin when he
started so many co-workers were secretly happy to see him put on a few
pounds. But it quickly got out of hand, with rolls of fat oozing between
the cracks in his Aeron chair. Still, nobody wants to insult a fat man,
so he just continued to grow. He never really needed to leave his chair
anymore, so he didnt mind it much.
 
Soon he beganIm not quite sure how to describe it, I guess he was
sort of fusing with the chair. The rolls of fat would sneak through a
crack and then continue growing, like vines crawling through a gate. It
quickly got to the point where he couldnt even get out of the chair if
he wanted too, the fat had locked him in. He could still roll around the
office on it but that movement quickly became tiring and as he grew
fatter the wheels snapped off.
 
Nobody really seemed to mind, though. He had become an office
fixturepeople came to him now. Hed chat with them about their day or
keep an eye on things for them. Since he was always there he knew
everything that went on in the office and people could always rely on
him for gossip or signing for their packages.
 
Soon it seemed like he was part of the office itself, like some sort of
roboreceptionist you read about in Negroponte novels. Desks began subtly
organizing themselves around him and employees began treating him as
just another office fixture. Theres the bathroom and theres the
kitchen and theres, well, you know
 
And then, one day, they left. Some corporate restructuring or something;
they were all being moved to a different building. People packed their
stuff in boxes, cleaners cleaned one more time, and then suddenly they
were all gone. He was all that was left, keeper of an office without any
officers.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November 10, 2006
 
Bathroom breaks?
 
posted by Carl
 on November 10, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  9, 2006
 
Title: The Millionaires Ball
 
She stood out, you had to admit that. In a crowd of people in suits and eveningwear with nicely-combed hair and demure smiles, she stood out as if a spotlight was shone upon her. Which, come to think of it, might well have been the case. Her hair was purple and spikey, her clothes ragged and flopping in all directions, one layer upon the next, each going inside and outside the other in a mockery of the very concept of layers.
 
She must have made her money in the dot-coms, he figured. That was the way the odd ones broke into the club nowadays. In the old days the new money was made through theft and abuse of office. Now any random computer programmer  or even the people who hung around them  could find themselves saddled with a pile of cash. What was that new site hed read about in the paper? Something about teens talking to their computers selling for a billion dollars?
 
Not that he minded, really. The place needed some new blood.
 
He strode over, straightening the lines of his suit as he did so  a habit, he quickly realized; in this case the gesture seemed a bit superfluous. She was standing by the wall, fiddling with her drink, looking cautiously out at the surroundings. Hello? she said tentatively, unsure if the tall handsome man was really speaking to her. Hello, he said in a deep gentlemanly voice and bowed. There was an awkward moment or two as he stood kneeling at her feet. She wasnt sure what she was supposed to do here. Then she kneeled down as well and looked at him conspiratorially. Maybe we should get out of this place, she whispered, grinning.
 
They both stood back up and glided to the door. He helped her into the car and had the driver take them back to his place, one of those buildings for the wealthy in the center of Manhattan. Hello Jeeves, he said to the butler at the door, before they begun dashing up the stairs. Is his name really Jeeves? she asked him. Oh yes, he assured her. We made him change it.
 
They quickly reached his room, a stark and modern affair that nonetheless managed to signal extreme wealth. They fell into designer chairs and he removed his coat. Would you like a cigarette? he asked. Oh yes, she replied. He removed a green piece of paper from a box on the shelf and rolled it with tobacco. He handed one to her and offered her a light before taking one himself. It smelled funny and as she removed it from her mouth she saw why  it was a crisp one hundred dollar bill.
 
He saw her eyes go wide as she looked at it and laughed. You dont burn money where you come from? he asked. I have to admit, she said, the idea had never occurred to me. Oh, its quite enjoyable, he said, removing the entire stack of hundred dollar bills and lighting it on fire.
 
She stared at the flame, unsure of what to do. On the one hand, she was aghast at the wastefulness of the thing. But at the same time it was somehow incredibly alluring. Lighting money on fire  it was like pornography for the rich. Her eyes went wide and he leaned in close for a kiss, the flames still dancing behind his head.
 
What else do you do? she asked, entranced. Well, we could flush some down the toilet, I suppose, he said, but Ive got something even better. Jeeves, ready the car, he said into the intercom on the wall, before dashing down the stairs again.
 
The car dropped them off along the water. She wasnt quite sure where; her sense of the city wasnt particularly good. They strode, arm-in-arm, breathing in the elegance of the moment. Its wonderful, she said, but I dont se. Just wait, he assured her. They saw a cop up ahead, strolling towards them, and in plain view he walked over to a building and ripped a small statue straight off and presented it to her as a gift.
 
The officers face hardened. Sir! he insisted. Oh, officer! he said, as if he hadnt noticed him before. How good to see you. You cant be stealing things right off of buildings, the officer said gruffly. Oh, you know I can, he replied. I can do much more than that. The officer looked increasingly angry. Ill give you ten thousand dollars, he said, pulling out his checkbook, if you take off all your clothes.
 
The officers eyes darted back and forth, unsure of what to do. But when he saw the check, he begun complying. He really could use the money. She laughed and he whispered in her ear. She smiled and begun looking through her bag. Smile! she cried when he was done and snapped a picture. He saw the officers eyes go wide and seized the moment to grab his clothes and toss them into the water. They both begun laughing. The officer tried to avoid crying. What about my check? the officer pleaded. He begun to hand it to him, before snatching it back and tearing it in two. He tossed it into the air and then they pivoted and walked away laughing.
 
They headed back into the car to one last stop for the night, pulling up outside some nightclub shed never heard of. Attractive young men and women about their age were dancing to some heavy electronic-sounding beat. He got up on a table. Excuse me, he said, excuse me! I have here a check for one hundred thousand dollars. Come over here for a chance to win it. They all stopped dancing and came over. Now he had them in his paw. He made them jump for the check, then he made them get down on their knees and bark for it like dogs. And they complied  a hundred twenty-somethings in trendy clothing, all down on their knees barking. Shed never seen anything so funny in her life.
 
He did a few more rounds of this before finally tossing the check into the middle of the pile. Everyone lunged for it as he climbed down from the table and made his getaway. Was it a real check? she asked. Oh yes, he said, but by the time anyone gets it itll be torn to shreds.
 
Back at the apartment he lifted her off he feet and tossed her onto the bed. He climbed on top and begun untwisting her layers of clothing, both going at each other ferociously.
 
She woke up the next morning, lying next to him in bed. He was smiling, gazing at her face. She was racked with guilt. Look, she said. Theres something I have to tell you. Im not who you think I am. He gazed into her eyes, slightly puzzled, and she was about to explain when they heard some scratching at the door.
 
He jumped up, just in time to be standing nude as the police burst in with bulletproof vests and guns. Mr. Januski, one shouted, youre under arrest for the creation of counterfeit US tender and check fraud. They cuffed his hands behind his back and begun dragging him away. Wait, he said, youre not even going to let me get my clothes on? No, said an officer, who he soon recognized to be the one from last night. Now lets go. They dragged him out the door as she sat there in shock.
 
Finally, she got up and put her clothes back on and then set about going carefully through the room, tossing everything of value into her purse. When shed done a thorough job, she locked the door behind her dashed down the stairs. Goodbye, Jeeves, she said, as she exited the building.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  9, 2006
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  8, 2006
 
Title: Robert Walker, Road Warrior
 
Robert Walker was the consummate road warrior. A decade out of college, but still single, his job as a salesman required him to spend his days traveling the country, making his pitch before assembled audiences of respected businessmen. Robert had never been one to get too attached to any place or person, he enjoyed the life on the road, remaking himself in every new location.
 
Since he had no one to come home to, he threw himself into his work, volunteering to take more and more days on the road, until the road itself became his home. Every place he went looked the same after all: the same white airports, the same chain stores, the same business types in the same suits. He felt he was getting to know the neighborhood and developed a routine: Wake up at the Westin in the morning, grab a coffee at Starbucks, head to the office to make a pitch, grab lunch at a Cheesecake Factory or a Chilis, do another pitch at an office, then catch a plane to the next Westin.
 
Chain culture became his culture. Aside from the commute by airplane, it could easily pass for just another job. He eventually let the lease on his apartment lapse, his suitcase becoming his only possessions. Soon he got rid of that too, adding the task of picking up a new pair of clothes as Banana Republic to his nighttime rituals. He felt freer, knowing that no matter where he went, the world would provide him with all his favorite things. All he had to do was show his credit card.
 
He realized the credit card was the only part of the wallet he was using  it got him his e-tickets at the airport, paid for his clothing and his meals, reserved the room at his hotels  so he chucked the rest of the wallet and carried only that. He decided to chuck his cell phone too  he had the head office call him every morning to tell him where he was to pitch to next.
 
Now he truly felt alive. A man with a card  that was all he was  yet the world bowed before him, ministering to his every want. The people he interacted with started to seem different to him. No longer were they simply service workers, doing their job to get their pay. Now they seemed like servants, bowing before him in obeisance to his power. Have a nice flight, Mr. Parker, Enjoy your meal!, Thank you, sir  it all now sounded like genuine emotion to him. It sounded like love.
 
Yes, that was it, he decided. The world had finally come to love him. The parents who never supported him, the girls whod quickly abandoned him, the friends who were never there for him  well, he now had the last laugh. The world now catered to his every whim, fitting his desires like a well-tailored glove. And all he had to do to get it? He simply had to train himself to want what it provided.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  8, 2006
 
Incidentally, today is also the day I fly to California. A prize to the first person to correctly guess what unrelated thing I will be doing today.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November  8, 2006 #
 
Hmmm, buying clothing.
 
posted by fatbear
 on November  8, 2006 #
 
Or going to the Union Oyster House for one last meal
 
posted by fatbear
 on November  8, 2006 #
 
Or walking down to the Charles for one last look.
 
posted by fatbear
 on November  8, 2006 #
 
Or looking at the falling-Fall-leaf colors one last time?  (No such thing as Fall leaf colors in the Valley.)
 
posted by fatbear
 on November  8, 2006 #
 
Buying and eating an entire cake to celebrate your birthday?
 
(Thats what Id probably do)
 
posted by alexis
 on November  8, 2006 #
 
Birthday?  Happy Birthday!  21?
 
Then its your first legal drink.
 
posted by fatbear
 on November  8, 2006 #
 
Or, in emulation of Robert Walker, leaving everything you own in Cambridge and starting out with a clean slate?  (Except for your credit card and - one presumes - lap top and iPod.)
 
posted by fatbear
 on November  8, 2006 #
 
Hm, since the reddit deal, just posts about money. One more soul lost to the bling.
 
posted by webcritic
 on November  8, 2006 #
 
First thing?  Doubting that the next thing youre doing is the right thing to do.
 
posted by anon
 on November  9, 2006 #
 
So, who won?
 
posted by fatbear
 on November 13, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  7, 2006
 
Title: The Early Days of A Better Website
 
A reporter asked me to describe what the early days of our startup were like. Heres my response.
 
In the early days of Reddit, there were four of us crammed into a dingy little three-bedroom apartment (I slept in a kitchen cabinet). Every morning wed wake up and stumble into the small space that I think was supposed to be a living room, where wed placed desks along all four walls (Steves wall had a small window, with a beautiful view of the wall of the next building over, just a couple feet away). The sky would be gray, the floor would be filthy, and wed be three feet floors away from the rest of the world. Looking back, its hard to see how we got any work done. Actually, looking back, Im not sure we did.
 
Aside from the filth, my memories of those days mostly consist of an unending series of petty annoyances and frustrations. Its hard spending your working days in such close quarters with other people. Its even harder when you spend your nights there too. And its almost impossible when youre all high-strung socially-awkward geeks.  Tensions frequently flared.
 
Not that there wasnt a lot to get flared about. There were always bugs or complaints or new features you just couldnt get to work. And when you finally got the site working fine, a new storm of traffic would overwhelm things and youd be back to picking up the pieces, making it run faster and more reliably.
 
There were lots of problems, but somehow we got over them. Take a nap, walk the fifteen minutes into town to get some food, go across the street to the abandoned playground,  or, when things got really bad, just look at that ever-growing traffic graph. We must be doing something right, we figured, or at least not doing much thats particularly wrong.
 
While behind the scenes work was a disaster, in public things were going great. Every time we went out, more people seemed to know what Reddit was. We started selling Reddit t-shirts and people wearing them and recognizing started to pop up over town. One fan, on a short trip to Boston, even made a pilgrimage to our apartment and stole the Reddit sticker off our door. (We only found out where the missing sticker had gone when he bragged about it on his blog.) Reddit heads started appearing on more and more weblogs and sites I read started talking about Reddit as if they assumed everyone already knew what it was.
 
At parties, the awkwardness of trying to tell people what we did for a living (We, uh, build a website. You know, its kind of a news-type website.) gave way to recognition (Oh yeah, Ive heard of that site.), and then to profuse thanks for a great time-waster. Towards the end, actual introductions became unnecessary  people started recognizing us and coming up to say hi.
 
When I went home to visit my family, my dad insisted on setting up a meeting for me with a magazine publisher he knew. I was sure the visit would be a disaster  why would a magazine publisher take a punk kid like me seriously?  but once she heard our monthly visitor numbers, she was eager to start a partnership. The same scene repeated itself over and over.
 
Even when people had no idea what we did, the traffic gave us confidence. Once we won a free meal at a restaurant (actually, we won at least three different times) in exchange for suffering through a short lecture about financial planning opportunities. As the man talked about being sure to put money away for a safe day, we looked at each other knowingly. Either wed sell big or blow up entirely. Staying safe just wasnt in our vocabulary.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  7, 2006
 
Wait, I thought Aaron didnt join till after Reddit was well underway. I thought he was working on Infogami
 
posted by johnnyboy
 on November  7, 2006 #
 
Well, to be honest it seems he really didnt have much ideas behind for Infogami, but probably for some reasons, it had to show up once at least, set up and run ,but bound to be abandoned. It is clear now that Infogami didnt have much or even few plans or visions behind. It was a wiki but he didnt declare it is wiki, and it really didnt even come near to be a blog platform. His relation with users seem managed just ad hoc, no policy or anything.
 
Otherwise it is hard to imagine why it was run that way, and abandoned in such way, and why no other option was pondered and chosen.
 
Writing can be an effective tool for sculpting and concealing. Many becomes dependent on it for its effectiveness at doing such.
 
Or there might be something more nuanced among Reddit team and it might show up. Two original founders seem almost wordless, not much explaining, silently just doing people. So.
 
posted by a.kusaka
 on November  7, 2006 #
 
For the sake of fairness and accuracy, Aaron only slept in said kitchen cabinet for a few nights.  We had proposed converting our pantry into a bedroom for him, but when I returned from a weekend away, he had arranged some cushions inside of the cabinet.  The vast majority of his nights were spent in a shared room with Steve  on a bed, a nice one, in fact.
 
I did take a photo for posterity, though, and I must admit that it makes for a good soundbite :-)
 
posted by Alexis Ohanian
 on November  7, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  6, 2006
 
Title: Mr. Millionaire
 
While Im moving Ill be running old tortured-psyche fiction pieces. This one was written in August of 2005, shortly after the first Summer Founders Program ended.
 
I kiss my girlfriend goodbye before walking down the front steps into
the waiting cab. We whir towards the airport. Ive done this so many
times that the whole act becomes some sort of choreographed dance:
step and lift and pull the suitcase, slam the car door and run towards
the airport. Wave my card at security and take the express lane.
 
Onboard the plane, I grab my business class seat and push the seat all
the way back, just to remember how it feels. I try to get some sleep
but all too soon were there. I grab my bag and head to pick up my
rental car. I toss my luggage in and pretty soon Im speeding down the
beautiful California road.
 
Ah, Mr. Delboy, says the receptionist. Weve been expecting you.
She leads me to a conference room. I take a seat at the tip of the
long table, which stretches all the way down the room, before
stopping at a mahogany bookcase whose shelves remain empty. A
fluorescent light gives everything that yellow glow. Three older men
sit on my left, three older men sit on my right. Lets get down to
business, Mr. Delboy, says the first man on my left. Please, call me
Jules, I say. Weve talked it over and were willing to offer three
million.
 
I lean back in my chair and laugh. Three million? I say, turning
serious. Please, I could find three million in my fucking couch.
Dont waste my time with this stuff. I begin to get up. No, wait,
cries the first man on the right. Will you take five? I sit back
down again. Ten, I say. Five and a half, he says. Ten, I say.
Well have to discuss it.
 
Back in Massachusetts, I head over to visit my friend Lou. Also a
programmer, he was laid off six months ago by a local enterprise
consulting company. Judging by the mounting pile of beer bottles, hes
had a rough time of it since. He plops down in the couch,
absent-mindedly flicking on and off the TV. FOX News pops on. God, I
hate these twits, he says. And the spineless Dems are no better, he
adds. I recently got this fancy-schmancy direct mail survey from them
asking what I thought the most important political issue was. There
were all the usual options: Iraq war, social security, health care,
outsourcing  but what about the poor, man? What about those people
whose lives really suck? They keep trying to railroad politics into
this safe little issue-oriented bullshit. When is real change going to
happen?
 
So, uh, my company is going well, I say, trying to change the
subject. Yeah? he says disinterestedly. Yeah, we got offered five
but Im trying to push them to ten. Thousand? he says. Million, I
say. Fuck, man, he says, a million dollars? You have any idea how
many mouths you can feed with that? Hey man, dont try and pull that
hippy bullshit on me, okay? Im as liberal as anybody. I donate money
to MoveOn.org, I read Nickel and Dimed, Im totally with you on that
stuff.
 
Shit, Jules, you dont even know what that stuff is. Do you even live
in the same world as these people? Five million dollars? Can you even
think of what that kind of money means? I mean, sure, to you it means
another jet so you can go galavanting around the world but do you ever
think about the people that youre flying over? Shut up man, Ive
got serious stuff to worry about, I dont need to hear your whining.
I look over towards the overflowing mountain of beer bottles. Get
some help, I say and walk out.
 
Im walking through Harvard Square when my cell phone rings. Jules here,
I say. Alright man, weve discussed it and were willing to give you
9 and a half. With what vesting? I say. 5 in cash, 4 and a half at
three years quarterly. Three years? I say. How about two? Deal,
they say. Deal, I say. Well fax over the papers tomorrow. I snap
the phone shut and keep on walking. Its a beautiful day in Cambridge.
The sun streams down from overhead, casting a special glow on the
minstrels who inhabit the Square and making the colors pop on the
tight-fitting tanktops the coeds wear. Jugglers are tossing rings on
my right. Change please? calls a hunched over black man on my left,
with his battered Starbucks cup extended. I keep on walking but he
leaves his perch and starts following me.
 
Hey man, can you spare some change? Anything? Please, I need to eat,
he says. I keep walking, but I cant shake him. He gets in front of
me, starts pushing up in my face. Hey man, I see what youre wearing.
Look here  I got myself a total of three bucks, fifty-seven cents.
What do you have? Huh? I say. How much money do you have? I stop
walking for a second. The man looks up in my face. I said I got three
bucks and how much do you have? he repeats. Five, I stammer, and
then it hits me. I crumple to the ground and start sobbing.
 
I cant take it, I sob. Im not cut out for this world. I dont
want to be in this world. I dont want to be this person. I dont want
to be me. I curl into a ball and start sobbing.
 
The man with the Starbucks cup backs away and heads back to his perch.
And the rest of the sidewalk traffic just keeps on moving, ignoring
the sobbing millionaire, lying in the middle of the street.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  6, 2006
 
that story made me throw up in my mouth.
 
posted by ugh...
 on November  7, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  3, 2006
 
Title: Everybody Tells Me So
 
I remember when I was in fourth grade, while we were eating our snack (graham crackers and milk) in the kitchen, my classmates began discussing the effects of wealth. Money doesnt make you happy, I insisted. I tried to argue the point, but no one else believed me. (The same class was later adamant that Clinton should be impeached, although they did spontaneously throw an anti-fur-coat demonstration.) Of course money makes you happy, they insisted. Just wait, when youre rich, youll change your mind.
 
I havent.
 
On TV, whenever a kid is given a to-him-large sum of money, the fatherly adult handing it out says Dont spend it all in one place. Dont want the kid blowing it on a single movie and then feeling bad that he spent it all. Someone emailed me the same thing the other day, and I had to laugh. I dont really know how to spend the money period. How could I possibly spend it all in one place? Donate it to the UN?
 
A friend told me to be sure not to let the money change me. How could it possibly do that? I asked. Well, first youd buy a fancy new car. I dont know how to drive. Then youd buy a big house in the suburbs. I like living in small apartments. And youd start wearing expensive clothes. Ive worn a t-shirt and jeans practically every day of my life. And youd start hanging out with different people. Im so shy I dont even hang out with the people I know now!
 
For months, every time we thought wed really gotten somewhere on the Cond Nast deal, wed get a call from Paul Graham. Dont get your hopes up, hed say. Deals fall through. Whenever we passed him on the street, Deals fall through. In emails, Deals fall through. It got to the point that Alexis put up a photo of Paul Graham and captioned it Deals fall through.
 
I got an email from Paul Graham the other day. Ok, he wrote. Now you can get your hopes up.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  3, 2006
 
Youve gained two resources:  money and time.  You have more chance than most of us to maximize your self actualization.  Your money opens up more doors that most of us wont even be able to get our hands on the knob.
 
Its up to you to find the creativity to take advantage of those two resources.
 
Travel to places that well never get to, meet people wed never be able to meet.  Help those well never be able to help.  Start a new company that attempts to change the world.  Try to fix the education problem.  Anything but whine about how unfortunate you are now that you have money.
 
posted by Egg Shen
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Im very interested to know what specific burdens, if any, you think come with this money?
 
posted by Carl Tashian
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
When you get to SF, go meet Craig Newmark. You know Craigslist. Read bit more about them. There may be correspondence, matching in the situation.
 
WSJ interviewed one of their top few months ago I believe - and talked about similar stuff. Or you may already know well about how they are.
 
They are in rugged (in a sense of homely) part of SF, Irving, Clement - in Sunset. I believe youd enjoy Muni ride til get there.
 
posted by One other, not everyone
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Money cant buy you happiness.
 
But it can buy you freedom. And freedom can buy you happiness.
 
posted by El Payo
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
My oh my do I envy Aaron, who has seemingly everthing going for him: Youth, talent, and now money, too :-)
 
Seriously, congratulations, Aaron! (Im not sure if I understand this whole Reddit deal completely  and of course Im not supposed to, after all its none of my business  but Im assuming it isnt some elaborate prank, as one Raw Thought reader said in the comments section of the Afterparty thread.)
 
To give you an unsolicited humble advice: Be careful with the money so you dont lose the freedom that El Payo alludes to above.
 
posted by FrF
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Money can buy you freedom and freedom can buy you happiness. I agree.
 
In fact Id argue freedom one of the main reasons hackers start startups. I cant picture Steve Wozniak taking orders from some bureaucratic wacko telling him what to work on. For some reason I bet that even if he had had millions in the bank before Apple, hed still have worked on the same projects he worked on. But money does not only buy freedom to its owner. Money if in the right hands, brings great things to humanity. No, Im not talking about some donation to the UN. Im talking about the crazy scientist and the hacker in the t-shirt that are able to start new open source projects, buy better equipment to run experiments  and because these people are not subject to the bureaucracy of academic/industrial research, new inventions take place that would otherwise not have existed. So yes, my advice is, look no further. Get books, get developers, create your own mini-research lab for that matter theres no need to spend the money in the traditional way. Good luck man!
 
posted by Miguel
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
I had a fun time finally getting to meet and chat with you for a few minutes yesterday!  (and, yes, folks, he did offer to pay for lunch, but I wouldnt hear of it - I was the older, fatherly guy - it would be unseemly, I tell you! LOL - but Aaron DID offer! And it was a taco joint, so I think I could cover it!)
 
And that Paul Graham - what a cheery fellow he is!
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Theres lots of advice here about how money and free time are great ingredients for happiness. But wheres the evidence of this? It sounds like hopeful speculation to me, by people who have never had as much time, money or freedom as they think they need.
 
Somebody in Aarons situation has a tougher challenge than most, because hes got too many choices. Read Barry Schwartzs The Paradox of Choice to get a better idea of just how difficult of a problem this can present.
 
And Aaron, the good news is the book also talks about how you can protect yourself against the dangers of choice. And hes like  your surname soul-mate :)
 
My impression of you from reading your writing is that you are vulnerable to lifes emotional threats, but that you appreciate a good scientific analysis, and are willing to apply techniques that will give you the upper hand. Good luck!
 
posted by Daniel Jalkut
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Fix being shy.  Join Toastmasters.  Live life.
 
posted by ZZZ
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
These posts are getting a little creepy.
 
The money has clearly already changed you since youre talking about it so much.
 
BTW, what is the amount?
 
posted by anon
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Theres lots of advice here about how money and free time are great ingredients for happiness. But wheres the evidence of this? 
 
Wheres the evidence? Its here, make sure to take note. ISBN 12345678 on page 3. Let me know if you have any questions ;)
 
posted by RRR
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
All this What good is money talk might be a troubling thought to economists. You dont sound like a wealth-maximizing automaton at all!
 
posted by Hallgrimur H. Gunnarsson
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
You could donate it to the Rockridge Foundation. (Or Institute, I can never remember)
 
posted by misuba
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
sounds like two things going on here, option-paralysis and guilt. Overcome the first by just getting on with what work you do best for a while, and as for the second knock it on the head asap. No large measures of good fortune like this are obvious or logical, but for goodness sake dont feel bad about it. You got it, now just get on with life. Dont feel guilty, ever.
 
posted by Ben
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Im going to agree with the first couple of posts - money gives you freedom, the freedom to work on changing the world for the better. And thats how youll find happiness.
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on November  4, 2006 #
 
The same [fourth grade] class was later adamant that Clinton should be impeached, although they did spontaneously throw an anti-fur-coat demonstration.
 
Fer crissakes, wasnt anything in your life ever normal? When I was in fourth grade I barely even knew who was president (a pre-impeachment-hearings Nixon). I vaguely knew there was a war going on somewhere, but only because the kid (as I now know he was - at the time to me was a grown up since he had just graduated high school) across the street from me got sent off to, what I later realized was, Vietnam.
 
I dont really know how to spend the money period.
 
You could find that homeless kid you met in the subway station, who was giving you the story about his mother losing all their money that she kept in her car which ended up getting bulldozed (or whatever the tale was) and give it all to him
 
posted by ged
 on November  4, 2006 #
 
Oh, forgotIt would be nice to have a ballpark on what you received for the reddit sale - just so we can tell whether you really are as clueless and arrogant as the past few days posts seem to imply, or if this is just an attempt at satire, or perhaps some kind of social experiment you are running.
 
You dont need to publish a copy of the ATM bank statement that you printed out. Just indicate whether it is an immediately life changing amount, or if it will mainly provide a nice nest egg at retiement if wisely invested now.
 
That, plus I am kind of a nosey sort.
 
posted by ged
 on November  4, 2006 #
 
ged, youre just jealous. And youre an idiot no question about it. Look at Aarons blog  how many entries are there in the past where he talked about all the crap hed buy the day hed sell his startup? None. Not a single post. If this guy was really a clueless arrogant hed probably be wearing a tie and a suit and be in some business school gathering talking crap about how hed be the next Google. How do you think someone in his early 20s is supposed to take something like this? Hes human man for gods sake. What exactly are you going to achieve with your post? Change a clueless arrogant guy into something better? Get a life. FYI, look for the digg acquisition  ycombinator gets between 6-10% and then they got less than 100k. 4 Members, 2 of which joined somewhat late. Run the numbers and conclude for yourself.
 
posted by ggg
 on November  4, 2006 #
 
Hey Aaron,
 
I agree about money not making you happy. Ive met people in other countries who had absolutely no money, but always smiled and were some of the most friendly people Ive ever met.
 
If you are looking to donate some of the money, I would suggest putting it towards micro-finance loans, which go to entrepreneurs in developing countries to eradicate poverty at the community level. (See Kiva and Global Giving.) I recently inherited some money from a family member, and am looking to do something along those lines - there are people who will benefit from the money far more than I.
 
Jeremy
 
posted by Jeremy Higgs
 on November  4, 2006 #
 
As a kind of reference, from one of the CondeNets holding. Gates/Melinda/Buffet, ex-eBay Omidya and his Adam Smith approach.
 
http://www.newyorker.com/printables/fact/061030fa_fact1
 
This years Nobel Peace Prize winner and some high-tech entrepreneurs are competing to provide credit to the worlds poor.
 
Although I dont think Aaron talked of donation as a serious option.
 
posted by a.kusaka
 on November  4, 2006 #
 
I hope you made a shitload of money and dont have too long of a golden handcuffs period because the Wired offices totally BLOW and the people working there are major dinks/douche bags.
 
posted by the grinch
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
Money is just a symbol for resources.  Donating money to seemingly worthy causes does absolutely nothing, because money isnt what is needed to solve things like hunger or poverty - its people and the decisions they make.  Think about how very little money was needed to put together Reddit, and get it sold - seems almost absurd, doesnt it?  Well, thats actually how it tends to work.  Its not about money, its about resources/connections/power/etc.
 
Its obvious that you havent been exposed to a lot of things, because you will quickly realize that you live in a country with millions of millionaires, and the Reddit money really isnt all that much  Dont do the stupid thing and retire young or crap like that - go surround yourself with guys who are older and richer than you and yet still keep working on cool stuff; you didnt have access to the club before, but now that you have proven yourself and made a bit of cash, they will let you in.  You will learn that yeah, you take your vacation to the tropical island and buy the house you never visit in some distant location, but at the end of the day we are all just people, and people need a passion to keep them going - and it just happens to be that there is this group of people whose passions end up continually making them lots of money.
 
Find new problems to solve, save your money, and quit talking about it publicly!  You are in obvious need of a good banker to sit you down and explain how this shit works.  Email anthony.noto@gs.com and tell him one of Goldmans anonymous clients referred you to him - as a tech analyst, he will know what Reddit is and possibly who you are, and thus he might be able to get you a banking relationship there (and some sudden wealth therapy, which you may need).  Of course, this may be a lesson in learning that youre still poor - they usually dont care about people with less than $10m.
 
Oh, and dont date any American girls.  Youll just find yourself shopping for your first ex-wife.
 
posted by unlisted.
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
Another concurrence, that Money doesnt make you happy - but it sure does increase the chances!
 
Aaron, I hate to say this, but its really clear that you have never seriously lacked for anything in your entire life. Nothing wrong with that, and Im not trying for radical-chic, and almost all people reading you are likely highly privileged themselves. But  youre writing as someone who already had enormous freedom, and wondering how it could be that even more freedom was going to make a difference. Lets put it this way - not many people are in a position to sympathize there and chime in with good life suggestions.
 
And youd start hanging out with different people. Im so shy I dont even hang out with the people I know now!
Funny, but not exactly true, else you would not have been able to get the deal which brought you what you have now.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
ggg,
 
Ill get a life just as soon as you get a sense of humor.
 
Deal?
 
posted by ged
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
Seth: The fellow students I was referring to in that section were, in general, even wealthier than I. So we werent talking about simply lack-of-needs wealth.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
Aaron: I wasnt basing my remarks on that section, but rather other things youve written. I suspect there might be an issue of confusion between the aspects of wealth as a matter of relative ranking in society, and wealth as resources. That is, sociologically, as you know, many (not all, but many) people with much money are into status displays of resources as showing social rank (conspicious consumption - the fancy car, expensive clothes, etc.). Thus money => consumption => rank => happiness. You arent interested in playing in that game, intellectuals generally arent.  HOWEVER, though conspicious consumptions isnt happiness, its a huge and annoying (to other people) mistake to derive from this that available resources have no bearing on ones happiness.
 
Money wont buy you love (though it will buy various services, which may be a reasonable consolation). But arguments stemming from lack of money are frequent relationship-killers.
 
Money wont buy you health. But it will buy excellent medical treatment (yeah, yeah, there can be a negative effect of diseases of prosperity, but overall statistically its very clearly worth the trade-off).
 
Money wont buy fulfillment. But it will buy a lot of freedom to try. While that isnt hapinness itself, its generally highly correlated.
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
Stay away from bankers at large investment banks like Goldman Sachs and Smith Barney.  They will just want to sell you things you dont need.
 
All you need to know about how to manage your money, you can learn yourself.  It is actually much easier than most of the problems you spend your time on.
 
I recommend reading The Intelligent Asset Allocator, and optionally A Random Walk Down Wallstreet.
 
Im sure that you think it is selfish and childish to worry about how to maximize your new-found wealth, but really, it isnt.  The better you are at managing your wealth now, the more youll have to leave to charity later.  If you think that the right thing to do is to leave it all to charity right this minute, definitely spend a long time thinking about that first
 
posted by Mark
 on November  7, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  2, 2006
 
Title: The Afterparty
 
It was Halloween, after all, so we donned costumes and headed to Harvard Square. (What are you? people asked me. I looked them straight in the eye, scrunched up my face to look a little angry, and said Im a dot-com millionaire with utter seriousness. That was my costume.) Alexis carried a sack of candy, Steve a sack of shirts. People in all sorts of bizarre costumes waited for the train.
 
We grabbed dinner at Border Cafe. Alexis handed out candy and shirts to the waiters while flirting, and offered to bribe them into voting for him in the Halloween costume contest.
 
I ordered a meal, but couldnt make myself eat it. The food just sort of seemed to stick in my mouth, each swallow painful.
 
So what are you going to buy first? someone asked each of us. When it came to me, I stared blankly. I couldnt think of anything I wanted.
 
Whos going to pay for the check? Steve asked. Oh, wait. I just realized, for the first time, that its relevant.
 
Afterwards, we walked down Church Street back to Harvard Square. There were a bunch of young girls loitering. Alexis struck up a conversation. Want some candy? Yeah! they all cried. He opened up the pillowcase. Want some shirts? Uh, sure, they laughed, and started fussing over colors and sizes. It was the strangest transformation, two mild-mannered guys suddenly become showmen, a horde of girls at their feet. Its times like these I wish I was a Vanity Fair reporter, I tell Chris.
 
Whats reddit? the girls asked as they tried shirts on. Oh, it used to be a website.
 
So why are you girls all just standing here? Were waiting for the Rocky Horror Picture Show! You should come. Oh. Well, we were going to go get crunked. Well, you can get crunked and then come see it!
 
We demurred and continued on, finding a flock of well-suited men, visiting from other countries, who fell for the same trick. Ill have to give this to my daughter.
 
As we walked to a bar, we passed three young girls in bunny costumes who Alexis tried to pick up. The oldest-looking one wanted to hang out with us, thought it would be fun, started giggling suggestively, a glimmer into a pasttime I didnt understand (my feeling is men suck, on both sides of the equation). But despite her best efforts, her two younger-looking friends shied away and wanted to just go to Rocky Horror. There was a struggle, and I saw the girls walking towards the bar and away from it several times after that.
 
By the time we finally reached the bar, my head was pounding and my stomach was nauseous, and I didnt want to go in, I didnt want to be here, I didnt want to know these people. I went home instead and watched a show about a serial killer and found myself identifying with the lead.
 
When I woke up the next morning, my head was fuzzy. And while I saw the costumes strewn about the floor, the girls brought home who slept in our living room, the odd emails asking me what Id do next, I still felt funny. For a shining moment in the morning, it felt as if this whole acquisition thing might have simply been a dream.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  2, 2006
 
The surrealness of this whole thing has go to be amplified by the fact that it all came to a head on Halloween. Im sure many successful people share your ambivalence about the day everything changes. Its such an abrupt ending to the journey. Its probably not much easier on your head than abruptly stopping a 70MPH car would be on your body.
 
posted by Daniel Jalkut
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
so the implication was that you didnt complete the trifecta of being a dot com millionaire and getting laid on halloween
 
posted by Alaska Miller
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Oof. A lot of craziness all at once. The cash can be a good thing; just dont think about it too much. Good luck, brother.
 
posted by Kurt Christensen
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
another story to add to a lifetime of dubious accomplishments.
 
semi-guarded truthfulness is always a joy to read.
 
posted by Daphne
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Youre rich. I get it. Nice brag post disguised as typical Aaron navel gazing.
 
posted by chaz22
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
I hope you fucking lose every dime you have you arrogant prick.
 
posted by 
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Heh.
 
Success is a mind-altering drug. Heres hoping you weather the storm.
 
posted by misuba
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Wow, this is probably one of the most self-serving posts Ive ever read. I rarely post comments, but this one deserves a public bitchslap. Come back to reality for a moment you guys had good timing and luck  time to stop the melodrama.
 
posted by Joey
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Can someone explain to me whats bragging, arrogant, or melodramatic about this post? Id like to fix it if I could.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Its a good post man, dont worry about it.
 
Listen to Hush Hush Hush by Herbie Hancock (feat Annie Lennox) and enjoy
 
posted by Lorenzo Bolognini
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Can someone explain to me whats bragging, arrogant, or melodramatic about this post? Id like to fix it if I could. - Nothing, their just jealous as fuck.
 
Congratulations on your success!
 
Best of luck on your next project and remember if you manage to hit the big time twice you get to write a book :)
 
posted by Parker
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
A friend just clued me in that I had missed something in the first paragraph.
 
For those that are as dense as me: reddit was purchased for a pittance. The founders got little more than a full-time job. Aaron was actually a dot-com millionaire for Halloween. The rest of the post was written from the perspective of a bragging, arrogant, melodramatic millionaire, which Aaron is not.
 
Its a good post man, dont worry about it.
 
posted by chaz22
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
I dont see anything arrogant or melodramatic about this.
 
Its a huge change, and while change can be good, it can also make you lose yourself for a while.  It takes some time to get your bearings back.
 
posted by Josh Charles
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Good post Aaron, dont sweat it.
 
posted by Ethan
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Are the critics familiar with the normal tone of your writing?  If not, that would explain it.
 
posted by Jason F.
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
(the normal somber tone, that is)
 
posted by jason F.
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Dont worry about people insulting you.  Success in other people does that.  Were all a bit envious (or jealous) of course, but you should not worry about that.
 
posted by the visitor
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Thats odd; I thought you were writing about angst over bragging, arrogance, & melodrama. That doesnt make you a bad person or this a bad story.
 
posted by Ben
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Its not bragging if you can back it up.
-Muhammad Ali
 
posted by Rich
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Lesson #1 of having money: people will hate you for it.
 
posted by Anonymouse Superhero
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Great read Aaron.. These last two posts of yours have been the best youve ever written. Keep it up!
 
Oh, and you had this coming, Im not the least bit surprised.
 
posted by Tomas Jogin
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Aaron  when I met you at ChiPy a couple months ago you struck me as a very level-headed guy. Theres absolutely nothing wrong with this post, the negative reaction is just a malingering puritanism that reads any report of success as immodest bragging.
 
Congratulations.
 
posted by Peter Harkins
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Thanks for the frank and entertaining post Aaron. Its better to be honest about stuff than worry that some people will take it the wrong way. I wish you and the rest of the crew the best of luck. Dont forget about us other YCs! ;-)
 
posted by Bryan Kennedy
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
I just want it to be known that I am not the Joey in the comment above!
 
posted by Joey deVilla
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
You seem the kind of person who needs a vacation. Go to Vancouver and hike/ski. You only live once and Vancouver wont be the same after 2010 Winter Olympic.
 
posted by 
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
I love that crunking it up was part of the post-acquisition celebration plan congrats man!
 
posted by Mike D.
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Congrats with the acquisition. Ive really enjoyed reading your last 2 posts. Im sometimes feeling the same (is it real or not?), after I wake up, but not as much as you this time, I guess. Youre bragging a bit, but thats just because youre being honest, actually, Im enjoying that too, so again, I hope to see more of this soon.
 
posted by Laurent Van Winckel
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Good post.
 
posted by Mike Cantelon
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
NIce post Aaron, youve got nothing to worry about. It seems people can be blinded by their hatred as well.
 
posted by john gillespie
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Can someone explain to me whats bragging, arrogant, or melodramatic about this post? Id like to fix it if I could.
 
Assuming this post isnt satire, Id say people are complaining because you sound too cool to feel happy about reddits acquisition. You have to admit theres some leverage in being unhappy: it implies that whats good enough to make other people happy doesnt have the same effect on you. Youre a pretty straightforward guy, so we can rest assured youre not acting a certain way for effect. Spend enough time with your local colleges hipsters and youll see the dance of people trying to feel more cynicism/irony/disenchantment than those around them.
 
It was the strangest transformation, two mild-mannered guys suddenly become showmen, a horde of girls at their feet. That sentence sounds melodramatic because I think youre exaggerating. You were chatting with some chicks on a street, not in the middle of a cocaine-riddled orgy. Maybe Im wrong; I wasnt there. It also sounds like youre talking smack about your fellow reddits.
 
If you rewrite this, I suggest you focus more on yourself and the emotional triggers for you wanting to disengage from the celebration. Reading your posts over the past few days has inspired me. You accomplished a goal without falling for the hype.
 
posted by Dan Stowell
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Thats a pretty sweet halloween costume.
 
posted by Jimmy Gambier
 on November  4, 2006 #
 
Some advice from random guy on the internet:
 
Start thinking about the next big thing - reddit is a nice start, but you were right that its just a bunch of links. Youre one of the few people out there thats smart and ambitious enough to really change the world. Whats the plan?
 
posted by Andrey Fedorov
 on November  4, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: November  1, 2006
 
Title: The Aftermath
 
On Halloween, everything seems a little weird. You see a spider web and its not clear whether its real or a prop. You see a nun on the train and think it might just be a costume. You see girls loitering on the street only to find theyre just waiting for the Rocky Horror Picture Show. So perhaps thats why, when I logged into my bank account this morning and saw more digits in my balance than Ive ever seen before, I didnt feel anything in particular.
 
Yeah, its there, I said, to no one in particular. We called everyone to make sure everything went through okay. Did I get it? Did you get it? Did we get that? Everything checked out. Looks like were all done here, went the email from the lawyers. After months of negotiations for this day, it had finally come. I almost felt sad seeing the lawyers say goodbye. Almost.
 
I sat reloading TechCrunch, then wrote a script to do it for me. Finally the notice appeared, elaborating as time went on. Then I posted it to my blog and others to theirs. It started seeming real. Finally, I dashed downstairs to an ATM machine and asked it to print a slip with my balance. Would you like anything else? it asked. No, I said, and grabbed the slip. The numbers were big; the money was there. I started grinning and dashed back to the apartment.
 
But that excitement soon faded. Post after post, congratulation after congratulation, insult after insult. Friends emailed and called to share goodwishes. Reporters called to talk to Alexis and Steve. (No, thats A-L-E-X-I-S. Yes. Yes. Well, uh, its a news site.) Users emailed to send congratulations. How do you feel? everyone asked. I didnt know. How was I supposed to feel?
 
TechCrunch called to do a podcast, asked us to tell the listeners the story of how we got to this day. And it wasnt that anything said was particularly wrong, strictly speaking, but I walked away thinking wed given the wrong impression. Companies getting bought makes you think of lawyers in suits at conference tables signing papers. And while there were lawyers and suits and conference tables and papers to sign (oh, plenty of papers to sign), it wasnt really like that. It was more just a couple guys in a apartment typing on computers and talking on the phone.
 
I remember how when reddit started, the whole thing seemed so childish. The cartoony alien, the barebones design, the fresh-faced programmers, the rented house. And none of that has really changed. Its just that with success behind it, its harder to dismiss. A scribbled drawing a kid hands to you is cute, the same thing on the wall of a museum is art. You assume there must be something there, even if you cant see it.
 
Its hard to notice this when youre in the middle of it. During the days, I mostly saw my co-workers, who lived and breathed the site. At night, I hung out with my friends, who all knew what I did. On weekends, wed go to parties for local startups, who all wanted to emulate reddits success. Everyone we talked to treated us like it was serious.
 
But whenever I stepped outside the bubble, things were very different. At non-tech parties, Id have trouble explaining what it was I did. (So you, uh, have a web site?) Once I went far outside the city to have lunch with an author I respected. He asked about what I did, wanted me to explain it in great detail. He asked how many visitors we had. I told him and he sputtered. Ive spent fifteen years building an audience, and youre telling me in a year you have a million visitors? I assented.
 
Puzzled, he insisted I show him the site on his own computer, but he found it was just a simple as I described. (Simpler, even.) So its just a list of links? he said. And you dont even write them yourselves? I nodded. But theres nothing to it! he insisted. Why is it so popular?
 
Inside the bubble, nobody asks this inconvenient question. We just mumble things like democratic news or social bookmarking and everybody just assumes it all makes sense. But looking at this guy, I realized I had no actual justification. It was just a list of links. And we didnt even write them ourselves.
 
But thats not something you can say on TechCrunch. You can say a site is cool, stupid, popular, a flop, innovative, or clichd. But the one thing you cant say, the one thing that everybody skips over, is that these sites arent anything serious. And so when Michael Arrington told us that these stories of acquisition were his favorite part of the entrepreneurial spirit, I couldnt help but think that somebody was missing the point.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
November  1, 2006
 
But looking at this guy, I realized I had no actual justification.
 
  I logged into my bank account this morning and saw more digits in my balance than Ive ever seen before 
 
Res ipsa loquitur 
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
Is Reddit part of a bubble?  Yes.  I think so.  But that doesnt mean you should underestimate your accomplishment.  People want to find others like them, and you built a community that let that happen.  The value of trends may be temporary, but it is still value.  Congrats on the sale, on keeping your perspective.
 
posted by Rob
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Congratulations!
 
Thanks to you and the other reddits for creating and growing the site with the community.
 
Im looking forward to your future projects: literary, software, or otherwise.
 
posted by Matt
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Well Mr. Swartz, let me be the 234,590th reader to congratulate you. I gather you feel a little bittersweet about this whole thing but cest life. Maybe sites like reddit and digg will provide ideas for more serious sites to come. Maybe one day reddit will be a giant on whose shoulders someone will stand. One never knows. The thing is, why do you have to be serious to be able to make a living out of something? You guys are obviously talented and maybe your work is not space exploration or ending world hunger but you, entertain and educate to a certain extent through providing the means for people to interact and share ideas. Remember that the free-flowing of ideas is, or should be, one of the most basic tenants of modern life.
 
Maybe I am just talking out of my ass. Either way, a heartfelt congratulations from a reader in Panama.
 
posted by Antonio Tourio
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Hi Aaron,
 
many congratulations, my guess is that you will look back and find the journey more fun that now you have made it .but i guess we dont realize that much because of that uncertainity of the final outcome which we comprehend to be more important than the journey itself .would love to know more how your life changes after this and things you think you should have done differently
 
posted by 
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Just sounds like youve got that day after the last night of the show thing (must be a name for it). Reddit is successful imo because it is a) useful and b) cleanly and tastefully implemented. Very little on the web is and I think theres plenty of space to do more of the same.
 
posted by chu
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
I see reddit as an extremely important social development on the internet.  Maybe you think this is silly, but sites like reddit will continue to dismantle the stranglehold the mainstream media has on content, and that makes us more free.
 
But I dont think you intended it this way, though reddit was obviously a great idea.  It has grown beyond you and beyond itself into an idea that will continue on other sites.
 
I was disappointed to hear that reddit had gone corporate.  But I understand that you are just a guy who needs a job, and are probably getting tired of working your ass off in your apartment.  In your shoes, many people would have done just the same.
 
And be assured that, despite selling reddit to a corporation, its idea will continue to flourish freely (as in freedom).
 
Ciao, enjoy California (isnt that where Wired is?).
 
CJ
 
posted by Charles Jillian
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Congrats Aaron!  And thanks for the honest assessment of how it feels.
 
posted by Aaron Farr
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
You are not popular. Your site is. Your product, the labor of your work. Do not mix these things. Theres a reason why some extremely popular celebrities talk in third person. Some even refer to themselves using two different names, their actual and their show business names.
 
posted by Julio Nobrega
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
shrug Reddit serves a pretty serious role for me.  I get about half my news from there.
 
posted by 
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
But the one thing you cant say, the one thing that everybody skips over, is that these sites arent anything serious
 
Think again about it - maybe there is more behind the idea of democratic news than just a repeated clich. Or maybe not.
 
Either way, at least this lets people like yourself not worry about money (at least for a little while), and focus on more important things talking of which, will there be another startup?
 
Oh, and congrats :)
 
posted by Andrey Fedrov
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
I always wondered how the money changed hands in acquisitions.  I kind of assumed it involved one of those novelty oversized checks.  Its disappointing to hear that it just shows up in your account.
 
Congratulations, Aaron!
 
posted by Altay
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Let me help you explain to your writer friend why Reddit is a great and popular site: Because its a distillation of most of the news on the web down to a simple white page; Because its a piece of cheescloth that keeps the links and filters out all the other crap;  Because its a beautiful weld without all the slag; In short, because its just a bunch of links not written by you.
 
BTW, I hope the new owners dont immediately start poking holes in the cheescloth.
 
posted by Ty
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
aaron, youre adorable.  success has gone to the head of your less-humble brethren (facebook, college humor) - thank god not you!  youll do fine.  and enjoy that bank balance.
 
posted by julia allison
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
hey did the blue come out of your hair?
 
bill
 
posted by bill
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Hey Aaron,
 
Breaking to new levels does feel unreal, especially when you realize that theres no magic, just focus and perseverance. In reality, business is largely fronting and strategy: igoring the fact that youre not big yet and looking for resources that can make you big. Talent and great ideas are mainly tools to support that.
 
You seem like a smart guy with good values now youve got the resources to do something really great, what will it be?
 
Mike Cantelon
 
posted by Mike
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Come back to the Farm soon!
 
posted by Jason
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
congratulations aaron & company, youre doing more with your uva degrees than i am :)
 
-alec
 
posted by alec
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
My heartiest congratulations.
 
I love that analogy between new startup and successful startup to kids art to art on the wall.
 
posted by Ethan
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
To the vast numbers of people I run into, the true potentials of the Web are completely lost on them.  Still, we dream.
 
Just a list of links???  Yeah, and Googles just a search box on an otherwise pretty empty page.  A page I keep going to, over and over, throughout the day.  Just like reddit
 
;-)
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
I find I have the same problem. When people outside of the scene ask me what I do for a living, it was hard to describe. It took me a while to figure out how to explain it.
 
Now, I tell them that I harvest souls.
 
I then go on to say, is that what I do, is try to get as many souls to register a piece of themselves with me. Once I accumulate enough of these souls, I can sell the whole lot of them to someone else.
 
Most people seem to understand this.
 
posted by Nikolai Gogol
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
Why did you turn down Googles offer? and How did you get reddit to be so popular? I mean you see lots of good sites, and some became popular, but yours was one of the few that seem to get popular overnight.
 
Anyway enjoy it all, 2 girls at the same time ;)
 
posted by Carlos
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
you built something that people find useful, presented it gracefully, and implemented it competently.  You underestimate all of the ways in which it is possible to screw up that simple equation.
 
If you never succeed at another venture in your life (unlikely, though possible), you will still have something to show for your time here, and that is more than many people can say after spending their entire working life at a soul-killing job, ignoring their wife and kids (if they have any), chasing after a pot of gold that will never materialize.  Why should you feel the need to justify your efforts?  As another reader pointed out, the justification is now in your bank account.
 
You can give the keys to the universe to a million men, and only one will unlock the door.  Most people dont even try to build something, let alone succeed.  Thats significant about your acquisition and the size of your audience.  The worth of your creation can be judged by the number of people who find it useful enough to visit every day, and the money which Conde Nast was willing to fork over so that they could make reddit their own.  An item is worth whatever someone else is willing to pay for it.  Perhaps your writer friend simply does not connect with most readers.
 
Go do something that makes you happy.  The point of having money is to obviate it as a motivating factor for your decisions.  I would hope that you wont dwell on justifying your existence for long; at the end of the road, the only person to whom youll need justify your choices is yourself.
 
posted by Tim
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Congratulations, Aaron!
 
Im a bit confused about why you find this hard to justify, though. There is a real engine behind Reddit, more than the bubble; its free content provided by users on the web.
 
Sites like Google and Reddit are about helping people to cooperate. Google does it very indirectly, through web crawling and link analysis, and Reddit does it more directly. Isnt that a wonderful thing to be able to say you helped people cooperate to enlighten or entertain each other?
 
I read something interesting or entertaining on Reddit every day. Your author friend cant say hes done the same for me, or for a million other people.
 
posted by Neil K
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Congratulations! you guys deserve it!
 
-Amr
 
posted by Amr
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
/gratz
 
Cheers, Aaron.
 
posted by naum
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Congrats, Aaron.
 
Reddit has been my new daily new/link addiction for a while now.
 
posted by Shanti Braford
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
I heard something about blue hair. Pictures?
 
posted by David M.
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Well, congratulations. My blogs been appraised at over $100,000. Of course, its monopoly money. Still, its nice to fantasize about selling Pottersville
 
posted by jurassicpork
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Good show. You made a difference! And, all indications are that youll continue to do so. Onward, upward. :)
 
posted by Thanks
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
You guys definitely deserve it.  Its been about a year since Reddit has  become one of my daily haunts.  Nice work.
 
posted by ejwt
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
You said you hate newspapers. But this blog also doesnt have any book like persistence and consistency about why and what gets talked of or analyzed. It seems this is more of your newspaper than CWMills journal.
 
Ex: Instead of reddit, why you did not show this blog to the person you respect - in the first place?
 
Which is you? (of course you can have many yous) - Then there could have been real discussion about building the audience - between you and that person, and why its important and so on.
 
You could have started talking with that person about things closer to yourself, as a writer,  Raw thought(Blog) and Infogami - and Wikipedia - and Reddit.
 
0: PC and internet came into the world which had context or problems,
 
1: and the era of Webapps and how Silicon Valley ways use the hype phenomenon among youth/kids(look at recent WashingtonPost article about Myspace) ,
 
2: and when you came into the world, your upbringings and your psychological traits/inclinations, and what you really hope for.
 
Why you write? Why do you need to write?
 
And why Infogami had to be abandoned?
 
You should think about it and talk back to that author before leaving East Coast.
 
I kind of feel that author might needs or deserves explanation and perspective - about whats really going on - by just looking at how reddit gets praised and how that author gets quoted in responses and comments here.
 
posted by a.kusaka
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Julio: while Aaron is perhaps not as famous as reddit, he did manage to get some notoriety before joining them (and before joining college, even). This teenager writes a pretty ordinary blog, then he goes off to college, drops out, joins a startup and now hes a genuine dot-com millionaire wow. Its been an interesting read so far.
 
Congratulations, Aaron. Hope you manage to keep your feet on the ground, but I think you will.
 
posted by Harald Korneliussen
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Aaron,
 
As someone in the throws of pre-launch development, I just wantedf to congratulate you. Wired seems like a really cool place, and if Andersons blog and book are any indication youll be working with some seriously cool people.
 
Your first success is a bit duanting and somewhat unreal. Time will give you perspective, in the meantime use your talents, abilities and resources to make the world a better place, at the end of the day, our contribution is all we leave behind :)
 
good luck and good times!
 
PS: Ive always admired your sites implimentation, lean, clean, useable and portable. Thats why its awesome
 
posted by Allen
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 31, 2006
 
Title: And Now, The News
 
My company was acquired today.
 
Friends in Cambridge: well be hanging out at Border Cafe tonight.
 
TechCrunch (reddit): always played second fiddle to Digg
 
Reddit Blog: you all have made it everything that it is. A number of you even stuck with us after we switched away from Lisp.
 
E-Consultancy.com: suggest[s] that were in a serious period of inflation, though lets stop short of calling this a bubble.
 
Matthew Roche: the Avis Rent-a-car of the content voting sites.
 
David Weinberger:  a very very smart move by CondeNetif they let the Reddit folks heavily influence how the service is developed.
 
Blake Killian: Conde Nast, the unlikely Disruptor.
 
Bivings Report: just sort of scratched at the surface of what might be possible if traditional publishers embrace social technologies.
 
Digg: Reddit is where you go when you need someone to explain to you why North Korea is heaven on earth and America is the devil
 
Wired News: Users can also append negative votes to stories that are of poor quality or that fail to capture their interest.
 
Mark Pilgrim: a new form of online scam in which you make all the content, and we keep all the money.
 
Media Wire Daily: a clear sign that Charles Townsend is making sure that Condes digital dick is solid enough to swing with the big boys.
 
Matthew Ingram: No word so far on whether the rumoured price of $65-million has any relationship to reality
 
Gawker: merging with the ickle kiddies  the Nasties decided they needed more of that Reddit magic.
 
GigaOm: Reddit received 16 percent of about 300 votes cast, following Boing Boing and Gawker.
 
Valleywag: I went to their Boston pad, we played some video games.
 
Webomatica: digg gone through a Craigslist filter.
 
Slashdot: the great big Web 2.0 bubble continues to inflate towards the popping point
 
The Register: the price is many heaps smaller than the $150m that Kevin Rose reportedly wants for Digg
 
Joey DeVilla: I see that Aarons been keeping track of what theyve written about the acquisition on his blog.
 
ReadWriteWeb: Reddit is another to have been extensively profiled by [us].
 
Press Release: Reddit achieves our objectives on both counts, and we are confident that other companies will find Reddit to be a partner that can bring tremendous value to their Web efforts.
 
Marketing Shift: The obvious question to ask is if Conde Nast will allow Reddits rankings to remain neutral and not benefit the companys properties.
 
CNET / MEDIAWEEK
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 31, 2006
 
Great news - congratulations! Ill miss your Cambridge/Somerville blog posts, but Im sure SF will be an exciting change for you.
 
posted by Daniel Jalkut
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
Congratulations! Hopefully you wont lose interest in webapps now that thats sorted - web.py has been an excellent side-effect of that venture.
 
posted by Tom Berger
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
Congratulations.
 
Is money falling from the sky yet? :-)
 
posted by Seth Finkelstein
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
Awesome! Many congrats to you and the rest of the team.
 
posted by Edward O'Connor
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
Congratulations! You guys earned it!
 
posted by Gabor Cselle
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
Congrats Aaron!!
 
posted by Jeremiah Rogers
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
What  you wont be out trick-or-treating tonight?  Congrats
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
Congratulations to the entire Not A Bug team
 
posted by Kenny Sanders
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
More proof that the only way for New Media to make money is by selling out to Old Media.
 
The revolution will not be monetized.
 
posted by Charles Eicher
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
congrats Aaron!
 
posted by Lee Bryant
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
Congratulations!
 
I wonder if and when Paul Graham will divulge whether this acquisition has turned Y combinator into a break-even or profitable company. It will be interesting to know. If true, that would mean youre now a millionaire!
 
Thank you very much for making Reddit what it is, along with the others. I have found a lot of interesting things online that I never would have found if not for Reddit.
 
posted by Ben Atkin
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
Okay, so, whats the real news? How do you expect your work to change?
 
posted by misuba
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
(Shucks, Im going to be at Border Cafe on Thursday! ) Congratulations, indeed!
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Congrats!
second fiddle to digg may be in terms of quantity, certainly not in quality.
 
posted by Olivier Ansaldi
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Sweet!  Congratulations to the entire crew.  When do you guys head out to the Left Coast?
 
posted by greg
 on November  3, 2006 #
 
Hi Aaron, congratulations. Go forward. Peter
 
posted by Rechtsanwalt Strafrecht
 on April 18, 2007 #
 
My congrats too. it seems like another story from the dishwasher to a millonaire - the american dream :-). But i think it must be a greater pleasure for you that Mr. Internet - Tim Berners-Lee u know and mentioned it: http://dig.csail.mit.edu/breadcrumbs/node/170
 
i would be ;-)
 
i wish you good luck for your future
 
posted by Johanna
 on May 12, 2007 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 30, 2006
 
Title: Up Against Love
 

 
When Laura Kipniss Against Love: A Polemic came out, reviewers seemed to have trouble understanding what it was about. Library Journal claimed it skewered our relationship foibles, the New York Observer insisted it was an incisive tract in praise of adultery, and the usually-reliable Salon called it a defense of adultery (twice!).
 
Against Love is a defense of adultery like Capital is a defense of playing hooky. No, Kipniss aim is to dismantle the entire social institution of, well, love  the notion that the right, meaningful, and deeply human way to behave is to find ones perfect soulmate by the time school ends and then spend the rest of your life living, having sex, and sharing your feelings with them. Kipnis thinks the whole thing is crazy, a justification for locking people up in domestic gulags.
 
Its pretty safe these days to get up and say our school systems are crumbling, our borders are shot, our government is a mess, our voting system is broken, or even that our economic system needs an overhaul. But try criticizing our system of love and all youll get back is stunned silence. Love is the one subject where no disagreement will be entertained, about which one truth alone is permissible (4). So criticisms, unspeakable in plain form, are disguised as the content of our comedy (take my wife please!) and the subtext of our films (The Stepford Wives, Rosemarys Baby).
 
Despite the fact that most long-term relationships fall apart, nobody suggests its the idea of a long-term relationship thats the problem. Instead were told that lasting relationships require hard work. So you go to work and put in some hard work and then come home and put in some more. Or maybe you spend more time at the office to avoid having to come home. Or maybe you channel your unfulfilled passion into shopping. Either way, capitalism wins.
 
We love to brag that weve achieved genuine freedom in our romantic lives, laughing at those barbaric Muslims with their arranged marriages. But is our system that much different? Careful studies find that people have a suspiciously accurate habit of pairing up with people with a similar level of attractiveness and wealth (although sometimes an excess of one can compensate for a lack of the other). And then they promise to live with each other forever, to working to make it work. Sure, perhaps you get a little more latitude in picking your partner, but is this system really that different?
 
Most people dont see love as a system to be criticized, but they do feel the social straitjacket even if they assume its just the natural way relationships work out. And they begin looking for an escape. Kipnis points to two: murder (lethal intimate violence  killing your lover  is so popular that theres an entire category in the crime statistics for it) and adultery (its popularity needs no statistics). Kipnis shies away from explicitly defending either (take that, Salon!), but she does suggest that adultery is a little bit of radical activism against the system, the critical practice of love.
 
She notes self-action generally comes before self-knowledge in these things; workers had walk-outs before they had unions. In the same way, the prevalence of adultery is peoples individualized attempt at escaping from love, each one sneaking out for an affair, stealing time from work at work and work at home to embrace their feelings.
 
But it isnt just capitalism, with its pro-love informercials and television specials, that tries to fit us to the system; the government gets into the act too. Politicians lecture us about family values, before sneaking out to cheat on their wives; states tie legal marriage to thousands of benefits, making submission to its notions of monogamy a prerequisite for perks. (Try to have several wives, like some folks in Utah, and youll find yourself in jail  not to mention the laws against adultery still on the books in 45 states.) And just imagine what it was like before no-fault divorce, when you actually had to prove to the government that you deserved to be unmarried, as if it were an injured lover refusing to let go once things were over (172).
 
Kipnis doesnt propose any particular solution; she just wants to ask the question. The book is written in the style of the postmodern bombthrower, with far more meat than most books of such form, although sometimes the styles excesses get a little too heavy. The books argument is studded with references to Freud and Marx and Marcuse, but done in such a flip and enjoyable way (and with thumbnail sketches of their love lives) that it feels like gossip, not scholarship.
 
But perhaps the best bits are the poetic descriptions of what its like to be in love, from how you find[] yourself so voluptuously hurtled into a state of possibility, a destabilizing, might-be-the-start-of-something kind of moment. [] that first nervous phone call, coffee, or a drink, orcircumstances permittingan incredible all-night marathon conversation (7) to the opening up required for relationship health [ which] will leave you feeling somewhat vulnerable, lying there psychically spread-eagled, exposed, and shivering on the examining table of your relationship (76).
 
The book is a tour de force of writing, but even if it was dreadful, itd still be worth it. What other book covers these topics, changes the way you look at love?
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 30, 2006
 
What other book covers these topics, changes the way you look at love?
 
I recommend bell hooks All About Love. I think its somewhere between the conventional picture of love and Kipnis.
 
Careful studies find that people have a suspiciously accurate way of pairing up with people with similar levels of attractiveness and wealth
 
Where can I find these studies?
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on October 30, 2006 #
 
For studies try googling for the Matching Hypothesis.  Thats what they used to call it in Psychology class, anyway.
 
posted by Thomas David Baker
 on October 30, 2006 #
 
We love to brag that weve achieved genuine freedom in our romantic lives, laughing at those barbaric Muslims with their arranged marriages. But is our system that much different?
 
Yes, very much so?
 
Careful studies find that people have a suspiciously accurate habit of pairing up with people with a similar level of attractiveness and wealth (although sometimes an excess of one can compensate for a lack of the other).
 
So how is this even remotely similar to an arranged marriage?
 
And then they promise to live with each other forever, to working to make it work. Sure, perhaps you get a little more latitude in picking your partner
 
 a little more?
 
, but is this system really that different?
 
 yes?
 
posted by Anatoly
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
Is this a problem? Looking at my family dynamics and my own choice, most of us married at nearly exactly our own social strata (and worldviews even). This seems to be a stabilizing factor, as far as I can tell, reducing tension within and without the marriages.
 
Reading this makes me greatful for what I have. Im sad that many have never seen a solid, long-term successful marriage modeled for them, as it was for me by multiple couples.
 
I havent yet read her book - she does present some interesting points - but the whole perspective sounds inherently self-centered. What about the children?
 
How about thinking beyond oneself, to your childrens childrens children? How many Americans think about that? Is their stability important, or our societies? More important than self-gratification?
 
Not that thats easy, or anything. Just asking (postmodern bombthrowing).
 
posted by Allan White
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
My drama tags didnt make it around what about the children??!!. EM just doesnt add enough drama! =)
 
posted by Allan White
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 29, 2006
 
Title: What is Elitism?
 
This weeks Sunday Bonus Post comes from local genius Kragen Sitaker.
 
Upon reading an article that claimed:
 
[S]cience is hard. It is therefore inherently elitist, merely in this obvious sense: as with skateboarding, some will be demonstrably better at it than others.
 
Kragen saw fit to ponder the meaning of elitism. Kragen thinks of himself as an anti-elitist, but hes also very pro-science. How to reconcile the two?
 
Kragen begins by defining elite:
 
An elite is a small group of people who are distinguished from the majority in one of two ways: either they are better in some way, or they have more power.  These are distinct meanings, although apologists for established orders like to conflate them, and sometimes one leads to the other.  Sometimes an elite is distinguished by the mastery of a particular skill, such as skateboarding or mathematics, and sometimes by past accomplishments; but the much more common sense of the term today is to refer to a group of people who have power.
 
Elitism, then (according to Kragen) is the ideology that insists that the elite and non-elite reached their positions through intrinsic merit. (This belief might also be called meritocracy, but that is perhaps a less pejorative term.)
 
Ironically, the very article that begun this investigation appears to believe in this ideology. The article claims that textbooks, in trying to be democratic, lower their standards so that even the dullest students can comprehend them. Instead, the article insists, textbooks must be more elitist and teach real science, which is hard.
 
Anti-elitists like Kragen and I would agree that textbooks should teach more real science, which is hard. But we do not consider this elitist, because we do not believe that only a small elite has the capability of comprehending physics.
 
To anti-elitists, egalitarianism does not require lowering standards, since we believe more people can reach higher standards with more resources. But to elitists, this seems an impossibility. The only reason they are in the club is because they deserve it; to let others in requires bringing the requirements down.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 29, 2006
 
Elitism, then (according to Kragen) is the ideology that insists that the elite and non-elite reached their positions through intrinsic merit.
 
This is a straw horse, making elitism a mere tautology. Im almost certainly an elitist, if not among the elite, but I recognize some set of people reach their influential positions through accident of birth or some other form of luck. (Less so under a meritocracy than an aristocracy.)
 
Anti-elitists like Kragen and I would agree that textbooks should teach more real science, which is hard. But we do not consider this elitist, because we do not believe that only a small elite has the capability of comprehending physics.
 
This begs the question. Lots of kids can comprehend physics to an extent, but theres no evidence that all but a few have the wit or inclination to master it. So the result will still be stratified, no matter how many resources you throw at the problem. True, part of this is because we dont have an unlimited need for physicists; lot of kids who may have the aptitude for it simply will never develop the skill.
 
It would be useful to identify yourselves as idealists. (Not that theres anything wrong with that.) E.g., youd be a far more effective physics teacher if you believe every one of your students can master the work, regardless of whether they will master it.
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 27, 2006
 
Title: Founders Syndrome
 
The simplest way to do something, of course, is to do it yourself. But theres lots of stuff to be done and not enough you to do it. You can get around this a little bit by finding friends who are interested in doing some of it themselves, but at some point youre going to have to start delegating, or getting somebody else to do it.
 
Now youre moving up in the world. If youre a decent manager, instead of running one project, you can run five or ten. Instead of simply directing your own labor, you can direct whole groups of people. Of course, itll still be people doing what you wanted, but  funny thing  people are smart enough that theyll begin to get the gist of things on their own and, if you do it right, your delegation will become an organization. You can disappear for a week and things will keep on marching.
 
But make no mistake, even those organizations are still following the will of their erstwhile founder. Even as they get big, they betray facets of the founders personality. The most obvious is in who is respected. My friend Emmett Shear has a theory that in each company only one class of people can be in charge and its going to be the class of people the founders are in. At Apple, for example, the UI designers are in charge, because Jobs obsesses over UI design. At Google, its the programmers, because Larry and Sergey used to code. Even though the founders arent directly involved in every project, their surrogates still win the day.
 
Now the problem comes when the organization wants to grow beyond its founder. This is most common on non-profits, where they even have a name for it: founders syndrome. See, once you have all these people carrying out your bidding, its pretty difficult to want to give that up. Maybe you can have them do more projects, maybe you can give them more flexibility in what they choose, but I cant think of a single story where the guy in charge voluntarily gave up his power. And that has a severe cost (which Ive come to calling the power premium) because giving up your power is often the right thing to do.
 
In non-profits, for example, your organization is probably made up of a bunch of independent-minded young people with a strong belief in democracy. These people arent too happy being told what to do all the time, especially when the instructions are pretty obviously not the best thing for the non-profits mission. So they rebel against the founder, and the founder tries to hold on to power, and things get very messy. (I dont know how things usually turn out in this situation. Maybe you fight until the founder dies?)
 
Less well noticed is that the same mistake is made by for-profit corporations as well, its just less obvious because the founder is the fellow holding all the cash, so you fight about it at your peril. But companies regularly do stupid things, even when if you asked all the people in the company about it they would have told you they were stupid. But in a capitalist economy, the founder has to maintain control.
 
But the power premium has a even more serious cost. While many people seem to be able to make the leap from doing something themselves to building an organization to do it, nobody seems to have been very good at taking the next step: going from an organization to a meta-organization, an organization that hires other organizations to do its work, rather than hiring people directly.
 
Why? Partly because few people get to be in charge of something the size of Google, where they need to take that next step to grow, and perhaps the trait of thinking that big is rare. But I think part of it is simply because the people at the top cant give up their power. Engaging organizations means youre no longer in charge of what people do or how they do it; the organizations have to be in charge of that. And that means youre no longer a delegator, but more of a moderator. Its founders syndrome at the largest scale.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 27, 2006
 
I would guess that the reason why
 
nobody seems to have been very good at taking the next step:
    going from an organization to a meta-organization, an
    organization that hires other organizations to do its work,
    rather than hiring people directly
 
is because we have a very poor understanding of things as large
as an organization. We have no effective simplifying metrics for
understanding whole organizations. So we have no choice but to
throw them all into a big capital market, and watch where the
dollars flow. It is mindless and perverse, but at least it is
something.
 
Dollars flow into organizations that seem effective, pretty much,
and dollars flow out of organizations that are ineffective,
pretty much.  With a lot of dollars flowing in ways that are
perverse by any standard.
 
Also humans have a pack mentality.  Almost all humans:
 
Are most comfortable working under an absolute leader
 
Are most comfortable knowing at all times which people are
above them in authority/power, and which people are below
them in authority/power.
 
Would rather step in front of a bus, than take on more
authority/power than they think they could defend in
conflict.
 
And, if they are humiliated by asserting authority/power, and
then having it taken away by someone they previously
considered to be of lower rank, they will step in front of a
bus, or they will leave that hierarchy/organization
altogether, whichever is more convenient.
 
So, we see a bunch of command and control strictly hierarchical
organizations carelessly thrown into large capital markets, and
not much else of significance. It seems stupid, heavy-handed, and
inefficient, because it is stupid, heavy-handed, and
inefficient. But people prefer it that way, and the analytical
tools dont exist yet to do it better.
 
posted by manuelg
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
To mangle Arthur C. Clarke, When a distinguished but elderly intellectual states that something is flawed, he is almost certainly right. When he states that something is the best we can do, he is very probably wrong.
 
Its certainly easy to say something is the best we can do, though. I notice you dont even bother to provide evidence.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
Actually, he never said its the best we can do.  You need to reread it without the mindset of someone who is already convinced what arguments will be used against them.  He says that its stupid and inefficient but that most people seem to prefer it that way and the best one can say about it is that it is A method, rather than nothing.
 
I think the reason why things turn out this way is that large organizations have so many moving parts and get very complex.  They need a certain combination of hierarchy and freedom- varying based on their industry and their employees- that is tough to figure out, let alone implement.  There is also a problem with founders being given too much power for too long, as you point out.  But this is based on two things.  As long as the organization is relatively successful, the other shareholders dont know enough about the business to kick the founder out.  Theyre willing to let him keep doing what hes doing because hes the one who figured things out and built the organization in the first place.  However, founders do get kicked out by their boards all the time.  It only happens when the organization has some huge failure (say after the dot com bust when Yahoo brought in Terry Semel to replace the previous CEO and the founders stepped down a bit) but it does happen.
 
The other reason might be that because of the way things currently work, the founder is usually allowed to keep too much equity in the company for too long.  I think this is less important than the first factor because they usually end up with a minority stake after funding and the first reason than becomes the main one.  Also, if early employees bargain for more equity, the founder will end up with less, so he usually has more equity because he valued it more.  There are many founders who have tried to hold on to equity and then ended up with nothing when the company went bust, so you have to give the ones who maintain their stake credit for believing in the company.
 
posted by Ajay
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
When a distinguished but elderly
    intellectual states that something is
    flawed, he is almost certainly right.
    When he states that something is the best
    we can do, he is very probably wrong.
 
First of all, thank you. I have sometimes
been mistaken for being elderly, but never
before have I been accused of being
distinguished or being an intellectual.
 
I am 35 years old, and the consensus is I am
an undistinguished idiot.
 
Let me take one point from Ajay. A
corporation has some combination of hierarchy
and freedom. (Lets define freedom here as
social structures that confound hierarchy,
but are provably effective, as opposed to
plain anarchy or disorder.) Our current state
of understanding (from my limited knowledge)
is that we dont even know what a metric that
measures hierarchy/freedom looks like, much
less be able to calculate it, much less be
able to integrate it with other metrics to
get an idea of the predicted effectiveness of
an organization.
 
So we do what we can: we pay large amounts of
money to people who are good at negotiating
for themselves large amounts of money (and
maybe good at absolutely nothing else), we
let those people run our corporations, and
we cross our fingers and hope for the
best.
 
So we do what we can: we staff those
corporations with people who have never even
considered doing anything else but working
for the man.
 
So we do what we can: we throw all these
corporations into a large enough capital
market to hold them, and we watch the bucks
drift up and down, succumbing to a form of
manic-depression based on the stock ticker.
 
My current employment situation prompts me to
try and figure out better corporate
structures (on a small scale, bigger than a
hotdog stand, but smaller than General
Motors), but I have to be realistic about
the hard constraints.
 
Theoretically, a corporation could exist that
throws away hierarchy at the very instant
when it would be effective, and that shifts
authority and budget in an ebb and flow at a
tempo solely based on providing value to the
customer. Such a corporation could be
outrageously effective and profitable,
because it discarded so many non-value
added activities (politics, power games,
accounting games, etc.). But if your average
employee walked into such a corporation, they
would be scared shitless and hopelessly
confused on the first day. The capital
markets would be scared shitless and run
away, because there is no established body of
knowledge to demonstrate predicted
effectiveness of such a beast as this
singular corporation.
 
I have a solution.  I know the way.  I have a
written document that builds everything you
would need from first principals.  So do
200,000 other idiots.
 
Anyway, I am positive we have passed Peak
Sweet Crude Oil, and in less than 5
generations we will pass Peak Energy. Also,
more effective corporate organizations will
be developed in less than 12 generations. So
mankind will have no choice but to take them
up, kicking and screaming.
 
Peace, Out
 
posted by manuelg
 on October 28, 2006 #
 
Oh yeah, you also said I had no evidence.
 
I think the statements I made make a model
that matches the real world, to a first
approximation. I would feel confident to
compare it to other models of the same
succinctness.
 
I beg for you or others to provide
contradictory evidence, and a different model
that fits all the evidence better. The
problem is interesting to me, and directly
relevant to me, so I want to learn more.
 
posted by manuelg
 on October 28, 2006 #
 
Aaron: noone does that because you cannot hire an organisation. You know the saying that loyalty is squandered on your company because your company will not be loyal to you? This advice applies only weakly to companies that are still small enough that they comprise a single social unit, of course, but that just reinforces the point: organisations are incoherent conglomerates of independent agents acting towards their own best interests, held together by some combination of money and the ambiguity of ideals. Unlike an individual, an organisation has no will or intent, and youre lucky to get its constituents all pushing in vaguely the same direction.
 
posted by Aristotle Pagaltzis
 on October 28, 2006 #
 
Actually Aristotle, organizations do have discernable intent; ask anyone what the intent of an enemy army is. We expect organizations to operate in the perceived interests of those who control them
 
But as for meta-organizations, could you (Aaron) clarify how conglomerates like General Electric fit in? How does GE differ from the meta-organization you have in mind?
 
posted by Tayssir John Gabbour
 on October 29, 2006 #
 
I dont know the history of GE, but my understanding is that they bought those companies instead of developing them. A better example might be something like 3M, but even there theres lots of differences.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 29, 2006 #
 
Tayssir: I had to think about your objection for a while. I am led to disagree. Armies appear to show coherent intent, because, well guess what would happen to a lone soldier who struck out on his own in enemy territory? There isnt actually coherent intent any more than anywhere else; the agents are still acting in their own best interests, but the nature of their environment is such that this leads to higher cohesion and more overlap in intent than is typical for other organisations.
 
Of course, every organisation has to display these characteristics to some extent in order to deserve the name; but there is no real coherence to the decisions and motions of an organisation the way there is to those of an individual. The example you picked works better than any other simply due to extremely reinforced command&control structures and due to the nature of the conditions under which it operates.
 
But even so, what does that mean? Where does it takes us? The implication would seem to be that in order to act more coherently as wholes, organisations need to be organised like armies colour me unconvinced that this is a good idea.
 
posted by Aristotle Pagaltzis
 on November  2, 2006 #
 
Great thoughts, much to ponder.
 
To your point on leaders stepping aside (the power premium): one example was George Washington, who, in the face of strong pressure to stay in office, set the example of two terms in office. He did so deliberately (c.f. letters and his message to Congress), and some say ensured the political stability of our nation in doing so.
 
I heard about a study into the nature of power this year - the conclusion was that holding on to power (such as a national leader) longer than ~8 years seemed to lead to a kind of inertia (or perhaps powers corrupting nature) that made it very hard to step down.
 
I work in a non-profit (one year now) that seems to actually be making that transition from founder > successor fairly well. A family business, no less - theres much less infighting and power struggles (I may have missed the fireworks, though). Theres a good plan for the power transition after the founders death (70s, but still strong!).
 
Interesting hypotheses, Ill be testing them.
 
posted by Allan White
 on November  5, 2006 #
 
Seems that what you remarking on is the following sequence: [laborer, manager, ], only you are stuck at the manager level. The following roles seem to me to be: director, investor, and politician and/or judge.
 
Directors of a corporation control its managers. Investors like Warren Buffet, control directors. Over them are politicans and judges who make the rules everyone must follow.
 
As one goes up the levels, more people are controlled, but the specificity (not necessarily the amount) of the control decreases.
 
What is amazing to me is the amount of raw power politicians have. They can force the most productive people in the most productive country in the world to hand over more than a third of their income to support projects controlled by them (the politicians).
 
How does the founders syndrome show up in politics? In our system, I would guess by endorsements and political parties.
 
In some sense, the Constitution and other law acts to control the power of politicians, and that is interpreted by judges.
 
posted by Daniel Patru
 on November 19, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 26, 2006
 
Title: Google and the Gradient
 
For a long time it seemed like everything I heard about Google was even cooler than the last. Wow, its a great search engine! Wow, theyre not sleazy like other companies! Wow, they treat their hackers well! Wow, they are hackers!
 
The feeling peaked sometime last year when I was almost rolling on the floor hoping to work at Google. And I do mean peaked. Everything Ive heard since then has been downhill, each time I hear about it Google seems less cool. Im not saying the company is imminently doomed or that you should sell your shares, but I definitely dont think its going to get any cooler.
 
Google is run like a socialist state. Its citizens are treated extremely well. Theres free food, free doctors, free massages, free games, a limited workweek, etc. There are ministries to give projects free promotion and support. The government tries to avoid getting too much in peoples lives. And Google is always coming up with more perks to give away. (Theres also a strong class hierarchy, with abused temps and powerful acquirees.)
 
The problem with a system like this is that its necessarily a bubble. Everybody inside gets treated grandly, but the outside world gets nothing. Indeed, because of Googles notorious secrecy, they barely even get to talk to the people inside. A friend whos a prominent free software developer says that every community member whos joined Google has stopped contributing to public projects. Its so bad, he says, that theyre thinking of banning Google from buying a booth at their next conference. They cant afford to lose any more developers.
 
Which means that Google has to be careful about who they hire, but since theyre growing so fast they need to hire people as quickly as possible. Its an impossible bind  you can hire lots of people or you can hire really good people, but even a company as prominent as Google is going to have a hard time doing both.
 
The solution, of course, is to pop the bubble. Theres no reason being part of Google has to be a binary decision. Google has a wide variety of resources and while there are some they cant really give away to everyone (e.g. massages), there are others that should be easy (e.g. servers). Unfortunately for them, Googles mindset is so obviously set that this will never happen. Even a company as woeful as Amazon is already kicking their but in this space, giving away storage space and computer power, with more in the works.
 
But lets imagine you had the resources to do this right, what would you do? (I feel like Im giving away a valuable secret here, but since nobody listens to me anyway, I doubt it will make any difference.) The right thing is to build not a bubble, with its binary in-or-out choice, but to build a gradient, with shades of resources you make available as people achieve success.
 
So you have this organization dedicated to building cool web apps. The first thing you do is you start giving away free food in the middle of San Francisco. You have a nice cozy area with tables and bathrooms and Wi-Fi and anyone interested in starting a web site is encouraged to drop by and hang out. There they can eat, chat, hack, get feedback, get suggestions, get help.
 
Then you give them free hosting. Servers and bandwidth are cheap, good projects are invaluable. But not only will you host their app for free, throwing in servers to scale it as necessary, but youll pay them for the privilege of hosting. Indeed, youll pay them proportionately to the amount of traffic they get, in exchange for the right to run ads on it someday.
 
So now youve got all the bright, smart young things who want to start companies starting them on your servers, with clear and unambiguous incentives: get traffic, get paid. They dont need to worry about impressing anyone with their idea; anyone can use the hosting. And they dont need to sell out to investors anymore; as their traffic grows, youll already be giving them the cash to grow the business.
 
Most of these sites, of course, will probably be failures. But who cares? Sites that dont get much traffic dont use up much in the way of resources. Meanwhile, a couple of the sites will actually take off. So what do you do with those? Give them more resources.
 
Put your promotional team behind them to spread the word about the ideas. Have your web designers, database jockeys, and JavaScript hotshots help them fix up the site. Encourage promising young programmers interested in helping out with something to write a feature or two.
 
And  this is where the gradient comes in  as they become more successful, you give them more resources. Let them move into the apartment building above to food/hangout space, so they can get more facetime with fellow successful hackers. Give them free offices to work in. Provide free massages and exercise equipment. Have your PR team set up interviews with the major media. Integrate their site with your other sites. Plus, of course, theyre getting paid more for more traffic the whole time.
 
Some of the sites will be huge hits, another YouTube or Facebook. The founders will be raking in millions from the traffic. And at some point, theyll get tired of running the site and theyll let it go. Youll be there to take it over, slap some ads on it to recoup the investment, and give it to some new, junior developers to maintain and improve. And the cycle continues.
 
(Bonus for the truly adventurous: run the whole thing as a non-profit and have all the applications involved be open source.)
 
A bubble like Google can hire only so many people and theres no way of picking only the ones which will be successes. But everyone can be part of a gradient and the successes simply rise to the top. I know which one Id work for.
 
Thanks to Emmett Shear for discussion and suggestions.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 26, 2006
 
But as a socialist yourself, wouldnt you rather work for a socialist state?  It sounds like you would rather work in a free market economy yourself.  Your argument against Google being able to pick the succesful web projects is exactly the argument that free market proponents lob against socialist planned economies, that it is impossible to centrally plan the economy and choose how to allocate everything from above.  Aaron Swartz, free marketeer?
 
As for your actual idea, there are probably legal issues that would make this practically infeasible.
 
posted by Ajay
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
I think this is a good business plan, and I think it would work better for some large host like DreamHost than for Google. Heres how they could do it:
 
First, create an ad service, integrated with the existing account system. As customers sell more ads, they can easily upgrade their hosting plan with the money already in their account. Next, as advertising revenue pickes up, offer more hosting services for cheaper, including free options. Then send out debit cards to customer-members, which only work at partner wifi-enabled coffee shops and restaurants who would advertise DreamHosters eat free. Finally, rake in the profit as customers become employees.
 
posted by Scott Reynen
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
Everybody inside gets treated grandly, but the outside world gets nothing.
 
They get a pretty good search engine and many other good free services. And merchants and publishers get a pretty good ads system.
 
But I know you werent referring to this. You were commenting on the Iron Curtain between Googler developers and other developers. This is indeed sad and has many deleterious effects.
 
However, most of the benefit of your idea is already happening with AdSense. External developers, Google ads. Done.
 
The only difference is that youre proposing that 
Google should also allow outsiders to use its infrastructure. But for that to be true, Googles expected revenue from doing this would have to be higher than if they dedicated that machine to something internal. So far this is not the case. There are lots of other reasons why that idea just doesnt fly (yet) but thats the main one.
 
And, Google does support external developers in Googles Code Jams already. Thats more in Googles interest than doing the Google Startup Cafe.
 
Google believes it has lots and lots of internal roles to fill that would make them more profitable; thats why they are hiring like crazy.  They want to make money off the developers work, directly. They have no interest in helping people start a business and making money off them indirectly.
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
Uhhh. I had to stop reading at nobody listens to me anyways and note: RSS was practically the word of the year in 2005. Lots and lots of people listen to you and its a mystery why. You really ought to write HOWTO be listened to to go along with HOWTO be productive. Actually the very thought of you wanting to work somewhere and not already being there is a little surprising.
 
posted by David McCabe
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
Google is run like a socialist state. Its citizens are treated extremely well.
 
If youd had any idea what a socialist state meant to the people who had to live in one, youd never ever think things like that!
 
posted by Ren
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
Ajay: I think central planning is a dumb idea. I also think unrestricted markets are inhumane. Anarchists have said that forever. (Bakunin: Red bureaucracy will institute the worst of all despotic governments.)
 
Its a rare idea that doesnt work because of legal issues; this certainly doesnt seem like one of them.
 
Rn: It was probably unclear, but I was thinking of the usage of socialist to refer to places like Scandinavian countries, not the Soviets.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
I think the best part of this idea is the place to eat, chat, hack, get feedback, get suggestions, get help. Hosting is dirt cheap anyway. The legal troubles that could follow from a more direct business relationship is not. The return for google would be a place to pick people to hire and startups to buy.
 
posted by ystein Fledsberg
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
Evan Williams has just started a company doing exactly what youre talking about - Obvious Corp http://evhead.com/2006/10/birth-of-obvious-corp_25.asp
 
posted by James
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
Rn: It was probably unclear, but I was thinking of the usage of socialist to refer to places like Scandinavian countries, not the Soviets.
 
Perhaps you should use the term Scandinavian-style socialist?
 
posted by Joe Grossberg
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
Just reread my own comment. I should have said Summer of Code, not Code Jam. Anyway, the point I was trying to make was that Google would rather audition developers to help grease the big money-making machine.
 
Aarons suggestion would only work for a company that was good at infrastructure, but didnt have any fixed ideas about how to use it.
 
posted by Neil Kandalgaonkar
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
Neil says that Google should only let outsiders use their infrastructure if the expected revenue for doing this would be higher than if they used the machines internally. That would make sense, if servers were a limited resource. But theyre not; Google could easily buy more and do both.
 
Neil also seems to think that Google has better profit-making ideas than the entire rest of the world. Even Google doesnt think so; thats why theyre desperately wooing potential startup founders and buying companies like YouTube.
 
I agree Google isnt going to do this; I say as much in the post. And thats why theyre going to fail.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
And thats why theyre going to fail.
 
Whats your estimated time frame on this?  Because I see google being pretty successful for the foreseeable future.  Im not sure that predictions like this with no evidence add much of value to the  idea of the rest of the article, which frankly has nothing at all to do with google (as you say yourself they would never do this), but is quite interesting nonetheless.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on October 28, 2006 #
 
I agree with you. Technical youth need a physical place to congregate and be inventive. Schools (perhaps other than top-notch universities) dont do a great job of this.
 
posted by Erik Bryn
 on October 29, 2006 #
 
Im not sure whether this approach would work. At the beginning of the gradient, the stuff that Google would give away are very cheap: Sure, you give them free food, space and servers, but that stuff can easily be acquired with very little money. The only difficult thing to replicate is the companionship of other smart people, but if you have the right audience of people (as you or PG do), you can easily convince people to drop by a Starbucks location of your choice and spend about <= $50 / attendee / day, although likely not at Googles food quality level.
 
Once a company becomes successful, they would start moving up in the gradient. Now imagine that Reddit would be part of such a construct. Sure, Google gives you food and stuff, but at some point youll feel like youre being ripped off by Google - $50 / day. Bah, were giving our genius away for free! But when youre successful, you can easily get the resources you wanted yourself.
 
IMHO, ownership is actually a better way to go. The YCombinator model combines motivation and ownership and seems more attractive to me than the gradient.
 
Actually, you guys should use the profits from Reddit and invest in nice cozy tables and gourmet food. Gourmet food improves morale and doesnt make Google seem that great in comparison, after all :-)
 
posted by Gabor Cselle
 on October 29, 2006 #
 
The first thing you do is you start giving away free food in the middle of San Francisco. You have a nice cozy area with tables and bathrooms and Wi-Fi and anyone interested in starting a web site is encouraged to drop by and hang out. There they can eat, chat, hack, get feedback, get suggestions, get help.
 
Cool! Were already doing this in San Francisco with coworking. From the coworking wiki (http://coworking.pbwiki.com):
 
Coworking is cafe-like community/collaboration space for developers, writers and independents.
 
Or, its like this: start with a shared office and add cafe culture. Which is the opposite of most modern cafes. ;)
 
There are two coworking spaces in San Francisco, ones opening in New York City, Boston, Paris, and all over the world. All of this is being done by other interesting folks, in a grassroots sort of way.
 
The space Im involved in, the Hat Factory (http://hatfactory.net), we already have a great mix of people who come and work together. We have a bunch of the Drupal crew, the Civic Space guys, a tribe of leading video bloggers and videographers, and me, an open-source/Ajax/collaboration guy. Even though all of us used to work by ourselves from home or coffee shops, we now have more community around smart folks at coworking. You should join us.
 
Brad Neuberg
bkn3@columbia.edi
Weblog: http://codinginparadise.org
 
posted by Brad Neuberg
 on October 31, 2006 #
 
Amazing though this may be (since no one seems to know what Ning was actually trying to do) this sounds a lot like what Ning was working on.
 * Host everything with the idea of eventually running ads.
 * Offer users help  in terms of free support, paid development, etc.  in getting their apps up and running. When you see popular apps, help make them better and more usable.
 * When users are succeeding, help them succeed further via promotion  front page, in site, external ads, etc.
 
So, I certainly dont think youre the only person who has thought of this, although perhaps Nings attempt was simpyl too constrained: You werent letting people take advantage of their natural and existing strengths, instead forcing them into a different framework, and really taking away a large part of the benefit of offering a shared space that the company could take advantage of.
 
posted by Christopher Schmidt
 on November  1, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 25, 2006
 
Title: Somervilles Oddest Park
 
Behind one of the exits of the Davis Square T station is a small grassy area that connects the T station to a long trail that stretches from Medford to Bedford. (To accomplish this feat, the trail makes some bizarre choices, like going right through the middle of the cities busiest streets and public squares.) To all appearances, the area is completely unremarkable  some grass, a grate, a few pillars, an odd sculpture. But if you look up, a bizarre exhibit is laid out in the sky.
 
The pillars, you see, stop above eye level and then continue upwards with poles. Atop the poles are sculptures, model replicas of important Somerville buildings and things. And at the entrance, soaring overhead, where no one ever looks, is an enormous sign: Seven Hills Park, Somerville. And next to it is a large cow sitting on a compass.
 
The whole park is filled with this kind of gag. On each pillar is a sign describing the replica that sits atop it. One gushes about a particular buildings importance to the Revolutionary War, then describes what happens to it. First it was sold to a mental asylum (albeit one for the stars), then the asylum moved and abandoned it. Then the building was razed. And then the entire hill it sat on was razed and turned into a landfill. Every pillar has a story like this: important landmark, cut down by human folly.
 
Then there are the sculptures. The sculptures are life-size replicas of people in everyday poses  sitting on the bench, standing with their coat folded over their arm, and so on  placed right in the middle of things as if they were real. So the first surprise is that the people who seem real are really sculptures and that the sculptures arent set off with signs or space but thrown in with everything else.
 
So then you admire the happy poses of the sculptures before you notice another oddity: everyone in the sculptures is wearing a mask over their face. Still, the faces all seem like happy ones, until you look at them more carefully. A father appears to gaze down lovingly at the infant son in his arms, until you look more closely, and you see that hes not looking at his son at all. Hes staring at the ground at the gaze of love is really more one of wistfulness  hes imagining he was somewhere else right now; somewhere nice.
 
In another, two parents look down at their son in what first appears to be admiration but on further inspection is more like shock. And shock seems appropriate, because the kid who appears to be their son is dressed up in a bizarre costume of suspenders and is stretching his arms like hes about to go build a railroad. I still dont know what in the world is going on with that one. It freaks me out every time I walk by.
 
Its weird having sculptures you can just hang out with like this. You can sit on the bench next to a woman hugging her small child. And you can look right into her face, get right into her space, get closer than you ever could if she were real, analyze her gaze in far more detail than would be polite in public.
 
And perhaps this is the real message of the statues, and the park: Things are always much more complicated than they first seem, and you can see it if you look closely, its just that were all to busy to notice. Nobody ever looks up.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 25, 2006
 
So a look of admiration is the same as a look of shocka loving gaze appears the same as wistfulness?
 
Sheesh, maybe you need to start spending less time hanging out with sculptures, and more time hanging out with people.
 
Or maybe just stop observing life, and start living it.
 
Then again, maybe I need to just stop judging people by a few paragraphs on a blog; stop assuming that is their entire life.
 
Hey! I think I just had a moment of growth. Thanks guy!
 
posted by ged
 on October 25, 2006 #
 
Have you noticed the quotes on the floor of the Davis T platform?
 
posted by Altay
 on October 30, 2006 #
 
The seven hills bit is also a joke, since it likens Somerville to Jerusalem. & BTW: the Minuteman trail doesnt go through Medford.
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
I dont know what its called, but theres another trail that picks up immediately at the Minuteman terminus in Alewife and goes all the way to Medford (where it abruptly stops in the middle of nowhere).
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
Sounds like youre describing the Minuteman itself, which ostensibly stretches from Davis Sq. through Alewife and out to Bedford, but which they extended eastbound slightly from Davis to Cedar St. in Somerville, where it ends abruptly in a bunch of weeds short of a merge with the commuter rail from Lowell. (I used to live on Ellington Rd., fronting that stretch.)  Anyway, its not like it matters to you any more! ;-)
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
Whoops, I was wrong about the Somerville extension being part of the Minuteman trail PDF map here.
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on November  6, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 24, 2006
 
Title: A Night at the Coop
 
This story is only what it is. It is not meant to be representative of any other experience.
 
The other year, when I was living in a cabinet, someone emailed me to ask if I had found a decent place to stay. Oh, dont worry, I said. Im sleeping outside the Coop.
 
For those who dont know Cambridge, the Coop is the Harvard-affiliated bookstore in the center of town. It has an odd sort of recessed entrance, that means theres plenty of outside-but-sheltered space to sleep at night and anyone who walks through the town late at night sees many (presumably homeless) people in sleeping bags taking advantage of it.
 
She didnt believe my claim for a second and ever since thats always irked me. Why is it so unbelievable that I might live beneath the Coop? Its got a fantastic location (Harvard Square is perhaps my favorite place in the world), nice atmosphere, and plenty of neighbors. Is a person like me living there really so improbable?
 
So ever since, Ive had it in the back of my mind that I would spend a night at the Coop. The opportunity finally arose last week, when I finally got my hands on a decent sleeping bag.
 
I made meticulous preparations. I took the bag and rolled it around in the dirt to scuff it up a big, so it didnt stand out so much (this really didnt do a whole lot, to be honest). Then I changed into sweatpants and a non-descript T-shirt. I left my shoes but put on a couple layers of socks, two subway fares and my keys. I buried the keys in a park by my house, spent one fare getting to Harvard Square, buried the other one inside Harvard, and then took my sleeping bag to a spot outside the Coop.
 
The digital clock hovering over us read exactly 10:00.
 
A musician was performing directly outside the Coop. He was quite good, sold a couple CDs, and encouraged people to visit his website. In between songs, hed make odd jokes about songs about his lack of a girlfriend. He chatted with a less coherent fellow on a bicycle who rode by sometimes.
 
There was a man in an orange jacket who really got into dancing to the music, before he finally took his place on a mat outside the Coop. Another man with a green sleeping bag turned in. I watched the big crimson flags outside the store wave, marvelling at their beauty.
 
Around 11 a whole group of kids blew through the square, seeming somewhat drunk and laughing. Little snippets of conversation could be heard.
 
Thats one odd thing about Harvard Square. If you sit at in the square and listen to people, you hear them talking about boys and homework. Meanwhile, I ordered breakfast once at a dingy little shop here in Davis Square, Somerville, and the girl behind the counter was arguing with the two older cooks about how the welfare policies of socialist countries affect their marriage rates, doing it as if it was the most natural thing in the world. After that, Harvard students really dont impress me.
 
Around 11:30 it was getting pretty empty and the musician began packing up his stuff. I didnt last much longer, so I laid my sleeping bag out along the side of the Coop and climbed inside. There were about five or six people on the other side, all tiled in nicely with each other, all in a different sort of gear.
 
I drifted in and out of consciousness for a bit, heard odd noises going past us on the street. Finally, I fell asleep around midnight (my usual bedtime), and didnt wake up until 5am when a subway train rolled underneath me. Everyone was still there, the day was still dark and quiet. I wanted to watch the sunrise but fell back asleep and didnt wake up until 8, by which time the sun had most certainly risen and everyone else had left. It had apparently rained overnight, because the ground was thoroughly soaked, and I tried to avoid the puddles as I went to dig out my subway fare.
 
It was right where I left it and I got onto the train without incident. My keys were where I left them as well and I managed to get into the apartment just in time for work.
 
What was so hard about that?, I thought.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 24, 2006
 
Great story and Im glad nothing unexpected happened. I guess youve got a good backup plan now in case life ever really takes a turn for the worse.
 
posted by Daniel Jalkut
 on October 24, 2006 #
 
What was so hard about that? he asks as he climbs out of the shower and puts on some new clothes
 
posted by David McCabe
 on October 24, 2006 #
 
Did you make any friends there?
 
posted by Tommi
 on October 25, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 18, 2006
 
Title: That Isnt Science!
 
Larry Wall once noted that the scientificness of a field is inversely correlated to how much the word science appears in its name. Physics, of course, doesnt have science in the name and is the most scientific of all sciences. Then comes biology and and ethology and so on. Then come the non-sciences like Computer Science and Poultry Science. And worst of all is Scientology.
 
In general, whenever someone tells you that science has decreed that you should do one thing or another that doesnt seem reasonable, its probably because theyre trying to pull one over on you, whether its the scientific medicines you see on late-night TV or the science of the behaviorists who say you shouldnt love your kids.
 
But nowhere is this more evident than when people try to tell you what science itself is. This field of meta-science seems to attract more charlatans and malintents than any other. If you control how the very notion of whats scientific is defined  well, then thats real power. Even if the very idea is patently absurd. (A real scientist would never tell you that doing X isnt really science; their goal is to get the truth, not sit around making rules about whos in and whos out.)
 
For much of the outside world, the test for a real science is falsifiability  the possibility that there could be evidence proving the claim wrong. This notion was invented by Karl Popper, who was himself an enemy of science who tried to insist that science never actually made any progress, that we never learned anything more about the world.
 
But even if we put aside this noxious pedigree, Poppers definition is still absurd. Take the distinction between astronomy and astrology. We would all agree, I think, that the first is a science but the second isnt. But both of their predictions are equally falsifiable  astrology makes a dozen falsifiable predictions in the newspaper five times a week. Poppers criteria isnt of much help to us, even on such a basic case.
 
Sadly, like many American intellectuals, the Supreme Court assumed that falsifiability was a standard scientific test. In the Daubert case it, as Chris Mooney summarizes the view of the American Journal of Public Health, blundered miserably and set judges the task of using this deeply confused philosophy of science to act as gatekeepers in keeping scientific claims from juries. Actual scientists like DefendingScience.org is working to undo this these mistakes, but you wouldnt know it from the rhetoric  after all, Dauberts defenders claim their just trying to uphold sound scientific standards. (Chris Mooneys book The Republican War on Science, among others, has a fascinating expos of the junk science/sound science notions cooked up by the PR industry to trash actual science. But thats another subject.)
 
What are the real effects, though? Daubert was a parent whose child was born with birth defects they believed were caused by the drug Benedictin which, in animal studies, appeared to cause the defects they were suffering. By making it harder for science to be presented in Court, these kinds of rulings make it easier for drug companies to claim theres no sound science that theyre hurting anyone.
 
America isnt alone, however. In Britain a group supporting what they call evidence-based medicine is trying to tighten restrictions on what experiments can be examined when approving drugs. Evidence-based medicine? Who could be against that! But again, theyre playing the same games. Behind evidence-based science are a bunch of very bizarre claims about what science is and isnt, taken not from doctors or scientists, but from econometricians (the subspecialty of economics that has to do with calculating things), which have quite a few problems of their own when it comes to the subject of evidence.
 
Under evidence-based medicine rules, doctors arent allowed to prescribe drugs on the basis of case studies and other reports; instead, the only real evidence are large double-blind random controlled trials whose results have a less than 5% probability of being due to chance. (Why 5%? No good reason. But according to the EBM people anything more than that isnt evidence.)
 
Again, you have the same negative effects: when someone tries to claim in court that a certain drug destroyed their life, the drug company can claim that theres no evidence to support this if the studies just happen to be 94% likely instead of 95%, or if theres only a series of case studies instead of a controlled trial.
 
This isnt evidence, this isnt rationality, this isnt science. Science is about trying to get the truth about the world, using whatever mechanisms are most effective at the job, whether youre studying the nature of planets in space or the nature of other cultures. When someone tells you otherwise, tries to insist that technique X or subject Y doesnt deserve the name science, its probably because theyre trying to pull a fast one on you.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 18, 2006
 
The 5% cutoff for finding statistically significant results is a standard in statistics.  So they arent just making that up.  It goes all the way back to R.A. Fisher. Of course, he was just making it up. :-)
 
posted by crh
 on October 23, 2006 #
 
crh: Thats what I meant.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 23, 2006 #
 
Im amused by the use of statistics in determining exactly whats true or not when the intro to statistics book Im reading explains that statistics will never tell you that. They will only tell you things like to what degree the data fits a hypothesis. Statistics is such an abused and misunderstood area of mathematics that I would say that anyone who isnt a professional statistician is 89% likely +/- 4% to be wrong about it. The book Im reading also explains how sometimes you just cant do tests like the ones they suggest. How do you do a double blind test of the effectiveness of birth control pills on human beings ethically?
 
posted by Michael Conlen
 on October 23, 2006 #
 
Econometrics studies the measurement of things (in particular of random variables). Nothing to do with calculating, for calculating algebra is just fine.
 
posted by econgeek
 on October 23, 2006 #
 
<
 
p>Aaron: can you provide a link or a reference where I can find a list of these evidence-based medicine rules? Id like to look
 
<
 
p>From my reading of what you paraphrase, it sounds like theyre only saying experiments used to evaluate the efficacy of medicines must follow a given set of statisitcal best practices. To me that seems a fairly reasonable thing to do.  But before I continue to rant about this, Id like to read the same rules you refer to, so that well be discussing the same thing.
 
posted by crh
 on October 23, 2006 #
 
<
 
p>Aaron: To respond to your two-word email,
<a href=http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evidence-Based_Medicine
 
I did try wikipedia
 
<
 
p>In particular, it does not say that the only acceptable evidence under EBM are well-designed experiments.
 
<
 
p>Three separate sets of criteria for Levels of Evidence are present. Two of the three accept expert opinion (eg. what your doctor thinks) as a form of evidence, but say that its a weaker form than double-blind randomized trials. This seems reasonable. Nothing on wikipedias EBM page mentions the 5% cutoff for significance.
 
<
 
p>Is wikipedias EBM page more moderate than the general EBM population?
 
posted by crh
 on October 24, 2006 #
 
A real scientist would never tell you that doing X isnt really science; their goal is to get the truth, not sit around making rules about whos in and whos out.
 
This claim is absurd. Real scientists tell you that doing X is or is not science all the time. In the US, biologists fight creationism. Scientists write books about pseudoscience or junk science and why its not science. Richard Dawkins has a new bestseller out on why religion is incompatible with science.
 
There is no contradiction between getting the truth and making rules about what (and who) is in and whats out as methodology goes for reaching that goal; the latter helps the former.
 
Its also absurd to say that just because you can falsify an astrological prediction in a local paper, Poppers falsifiability criterion is thereby refuted. Popper advanced the falsifiability criterion as a necessary condition for a scientific theory, not a sufficient one. I can make all sorts of falsifiable predictions (for example, which of my friends are going to marry or divorce over the next few years), and it wouldnt mean that Im basing them on a scientific theory.
 
posted by Anatoly
 on October 24, 2006 #
 
Creationism, psuedoscience, and junk science are claims, not methodologies.
 
And can you think of anything useful that falsifiability does?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 24, 2006 #
 
I disagree with your point about astrology.
 
The whole reason people believe in astrology is not because they believe in the theoretical underpinnings of it.
 
They believe because the predictions are sufficiently vague that they apply to everybody all the time.
 
Ive heard a story about a prof who hands out personalized astrology readings to everybody in their class, and then has them rate how accurate the prediction is. Most people rate the predictions fairly highly.
 
He then reveals that everybody has the same prediction.
 
posted by Eric Gunnerson
 on October 24, 2006 #
 
Creationism isnt simply a claim, its a movement. It has its own methodology, its own researchers, its own journals. Its methodology provides one of the main lines of attack scientists use when they argue that creationism isnt science, and falsifiability - or lack thereof in creationalist methodology - happens to be one of the primary arguments they use. For example, the claim that God created Earth 6k years ago - but did it with all the exact evidence that seems to show its much older (with fossils already in the ground, etc.) - is internally consistent. It is, however, unfalsifiable and therefore arguably unscientific.
 
Falsifiability is used all the time. Theres a current debate about string theory in physics with two books out, by Peter Woit and Lee Smolin, arguing that string theory never made good on its promise to deliver testable predictions. You cant have a testable prediction if the theorys unfalsifiable.
 
Falsifiability is one of the arguments that were used to show that Marxism and Freudian psychoanalysis are pseudoscience and not science. Both claimed to be scienctific, both convinced many people (including real scientists). Popper, whom you glibly and absurdly condemn as an enemy of science, was the first to realise that psychoanalysis was flexible enough to explain any behaviour whatsoever, and therefore didnt really explain anything. Marxism as a real economic theory could be and was falsified, but as actually practiced by Marxists it was unfalsifiable.
 
posted by Anatoly
 on October 24, 2006 #
 
posted by 
 on October 24, 2006 #
 
Larry Wall once noted that the scientificness of a field is inversely correlated to how much the word science appears in its name.
 
This is ludicrous. Is Islam more scientific than computing science? And what about Chemistry and Christianity? Neither of them have science in the name. Do we thus conclude that their status is equal? If Physics was renamed Phyiscal Science tomorrow would it lose its scientificness? If Scientology became Hubbardology would it increase in scientificness?
 
The reason why older sciences like Physics do not have the word science in their name is simple - when they were born, centuries ago, the notion of science had not yet been clearly articulated (Indeed the more modern meaning of the word science dates back to only the early 17th century).
 
The name computing science is appropriate as the word computing denotes an awful lot of activities not all of which can be described as scientific.
 
Whether or not a field is scientific can be determined only by the nature of its activity and not simply by its name.
 
posted by Eric
 on October 24, 2006 #
 
Its called a joke.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 25, 2006 #
 
Falsifiability is a necessary but by no means sufficient condition for something to be scientific. It seems to me that it is not only a question of whether a field states falsifiable proposition that makes it a science. It also depends on whether someone actually bothers to falsify these propositions which is probably not the case for astrology.
 
And I dont get your point about scientists using whatever methods will get them to the truth at all. If the method is such that you will not be able to tell truth from falsehood, then what good does it do you?
 
posted by Tobias
 on October 25, 2006 #
 
For a similar article that makes a run at double blind experiments and how testing takes place nowadays and has more compelling and coherent points to make, read this article.  However, while that article also tries to drive in a similar direction, Im not sure he ever gets there.  Yes, there are huge problems with the way many experiments are done, but hes largely arguing that double-blind experiments are not executed well, rather than arguing against the concept.  I think theres scope for other types of scientific experiments that take into account the ethical problems that human experiments can have.  For example, once double-blind experiments are done and something has been released to the public, why arent all uses of the drug tracked and any adverse affects immediately noted?  Why did more than 25,000 people have to have heart attacks before the drug Vioxx was finally pulled?
 
Your attack on falsifiability is ridiculous, Aaron.  As Eric points out, astrology is actually not falsifiable most of the time because the predictions are designed to be vague, Something good will happen to you this week.  And what does it matter if the number chosen for statistics is 5%?  Its like arguing that there should be no blood alcohol limit for drunk drivers because 0.08 is an arbitrary number.  If you have a case for it being higher or lower or would like to use better statistical methods, fine, make your point.  But to use anecdotal evidence of one person who has a problem and to point to genuinely murky scientific results like animal tests (animal tests sometimes predict what happens to humans and sometimes dont) is not much of an argument.  Double blind tests are the best methods we have come up with to tell when something is working or when it isnt.  When you argue against them, YOU are in fact arguing against science and rationality, especially if your only argument is that 5% is an arbitrary cutoff.
 
I do agree with you that these double blind experiments may be misused if people say that they prove that Benedictin doesnt cause birth defects.  However, they are right about a weaker but still relevant point: the experiments do show that we do not know what caused the problems and it is unlikely that it was this drug (assuming they ran their experiments properly, as detailed in the first link).
 
Finally, I agree that econometrics has many problems, though I havent looked into the matter very deeply.  However, the same econometric mathematical models are used by the global warming crowd to reach their doomsday predictions (links: 
1, 
2, 
3).  Still skeptical about econometrics?
 
posted by Ajay
 on October 26, 2006 #
 
And can you think of anything useful that falsifiability does?
 
Absolutely, it directs people to work towards areas that yield real scientific progress, where we can test models against reality, rather than complete speculation.  Its the reason that many may have wasted their lives (from a scientific perspective) if string theory doesnt pan out.  There are certainly legitimate reasons to create non-falsifiable claims, and discuss non-falsifiable issues, but they are not scientific claims/issues at that point.
 
posted by Jacob Rus
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
Yeah, that must be it. The physicists involved in string theorists must all be idiots who never heard of Karl Popper or read the newspaper or watched a television special about themselves. If only they knew they werent doing science!
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
String theorists do know theyre not doing science in the full sense. They know their theory isnt falsifiableit doesnt make ANY predictions about reality that can be observed! That puts it closer to the unfortunate class that Intelligent Design is in. However, two things may set String Theory apart: the fact that some of the brightest minds on the planet are working on it, and that it does predict some things that may one day be testable/observable, but we dont have the technology to be able to test them yet.
 
(This is just some thoughts based off a recent Slashdot posting.)
 
posted by Scott Teresi
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
Aaron, in case you didnt know, string theory is considered controversial for precisely the reasons that Jacob lays out.  In fact, as Scott points out, the theorists would probably be the first to admit that theyre not actually doing science, just scouting out the possible solution space for likely answers.  The scientific method will then involve testing these hypotheses to see what holds true.  Instead of finding out more about this or asking questions, all you offer is ridicule, which is especially jarring considering your ignorance of this subject.
 
posted by Ajay
 on October 28, 2006 #
 
I do think its ridiculous that Jacob presumes to tell prominent physicists how to spend their time.
 
Vague predictions are falsifiable; theyre just less likely to be wrong. And my argument isnt that 5% is too high or too low, its that its arbitrary. If a study works only at 6% should we sentence people to death because were missing the other 1%. (Actually, what really happens is that people fake the data to get it over the hump, as a recent paper proved.) Evidence doesnt have clean lines between true and false; we depend on the situation to decide how strong our standards should be.
 
Whos arguing against double-blind tests? All Im saying is that other stuff is evidence too.
 
An economist doesnt believe global warmingso I should like economics more? Please.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 29, 2006 #
 
Aaron, where do you come up with these obtuse arguments?
 
I do think its ridiculous that Jacob presumes to tell prominent physicists how to spend their time.
 
Jacob didnt tell anybody how to spend their time.  He pointed out the common criticism that string theory might turn out to be a complete waste of time because they have yet to make predictions that are testable.
 
Vague predictions are falsifiable; theyre just less likely to be wrong.
 
It depends on who youre trying to prove it to.  Scientists and intelligent laymen know that astrology is falsifiable and that it mostly comes out wrong.  However, the kind of people who believe in astrology are willing to seize on anything that might fit the prediction.  Something good will happen to you this week = Monday was a bright and sunny day.  Since you said falsifiability isnt much help, we took it for granted you were talking about these dim people.  For them, it is unfalsifiable because they are willing to make their definitions so broad as to be meaningless.
 
And my argument isnt that 5% is too high or too low, its that its arbitrary. If a study works only at 6% should we sentence people to death because were missing the other 1%. (Actually, what really happens is that people fake the data to get it over the hump, as a recent paper proved.) Evidence doesnt have clean lines between true and false; we depend on the situation to decide how strong our standards should be.
 
5% is not an arbitrary cutoff if comparison of many studies has shown it to be a good cutoff between studies that show repeatable results and those that dont.  Im guessing thats how it was arrived at.  You setup a false situation by assuming that a whole bunch of studies cluster around that number and that any of them over 5% are then tossed away as a result.  There are very likely few studies that even get close to that threshold.  Besides, I doubt that doctors actually use a hard threshold like that.  What you seem to be primarily talking about is a legal threshold, which seems to be required by the way the law works.  I agree with you that if doctors are actually using a hard theshold like that, it doesnt make much sense, but I doubt that they do.
 
Whos arguing against double-blind tests? All Im saying is that other stuff is evidence too.
 
Presumably you want to use other tests because you see some weakness or failing in double-blind tests that you would like to address.  And you did say, Behind evidence-based science are a bunch of very bizarre claims about what science is and isnt, which combined with your attack on falsifiability would appear to be an attack on the method theyre advocating.  And Im not (and I dont think the others are) saying that there arent any problems with that way things are done.  I previously pointed out that more effective follow-up studies should be done.  What were doing is pointing out that your particular criticisms dont hold much water.  Falsifiability is a necessary condition for science, animal tests arent that helpful, anecdotal examples are not useful on their own, and case studies can be problematic.
 
An economist doesnt believe global warmingso I should like economics more? Please.
 
Perhaps you didnt read those posts properly, let me summarize.  He is a former economist who points out that econometrics has failed miserably at what it was devised for, macroeconomics.  He then goes on to point out that the same type of models, that you have claimed skepticism about, are used to make the dire predictions coming from the global warming crowd.  Do you see how this points out a contradiction for you?
 
posted by Ajay
 on October 29, 2006 #
 
Ajay now insists that theories can be true or not true depending on who reads them, that because so many people use the number 5 it simply must have been chosen through studies (although he hasnt seen any), and that because economics once was wrong its a contradiction to believe that environmental studies are now right. I think Ajay should refrain from posting again until he learns basic principles of logic and evidence.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 29, 2006 #
 
Ajay now insists that theories can be true or not true depending on who reads them
  No, what I said was that different people have different standards of evidence.  The reason we call them theories and not laws is because new evidence may always come up that could overturn what we believe.  Many people have very low standards of evidence; that is why they believe in astrology.
 
because so many people use the number 5 it simply must have been chosen through studies (although he hasnt seen any)
  No, I said that as long as it was only used as a legal standard, its probably okay.  Its true that I didnt cite any studies, but then neither did you.  Am I to be held to a higher standard?
 
because economics once was wrong its a contradiction to believe that environmental studies are now right.
  Since you took the time to define econometrics above, you obviously know the difference between the two and that your conflation of the two is a misrepresentation of what Im saying (your lies are Cheney-esque).  Whos talking about environmental studies?  Were talking about econometric models that purport to forecast future  global warming based on current trends.
 
In your comments over the last several months, you repeatedly make bizarre statements or seize on irrelevant, minor points.  Arguing with you is like arguing with a child, a style of discourse that Jon Stewart ripped in his famous Crossfire episode (though to be fair to you, those guys choose even more trivial points and only speak in repeated bromides).
 
posted by Ajay
 on October 30, 2006 #
 
And arguing with you is like having an email debate with someone who cant read.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 30, 2006 #
 
Dear Aharon, When I was at Faculty, I always thought Poppers claims on falsifiability were bogus. The proper term must be testability although many aspects of nature are not testable because we lack adequate techniques to test them. However, those unverifiable aspects of nature can be deduced from careful and repeatable or attainable observations. Mathematics has many times helped us with solutions and explanations to several observed natural events, but it is spot on also that mathematics is a formal science (created by the human mind) that most times is not compatible with reality. For example, through equations theoreticians can deduce the existence of parallel universes, strings, branes, living bubbles, etc.; but those things do not exist in real nature and, if existed, they are not observable, so it is trivial even to consider it as knowledge. Science is a set of knowledge about the Universe ordered and systematized by means of observation, analysis and experimentation, which permits the deduction of principles (theories) and general laws.
 
posted by Nasif Nahle
 on November  7, 2006 #
 
While the M-theory (based upon so much frustrating work with different models of the string theory) cannot be considered true science because of the falsifiability aspect, it is highly improbable that future falsifiable theories that will emerge will be entirely different from it. There are too many happy coincidences in this approach to be just junk! An educated guess will say that at least chunks of it will be part of any new theory!
In fact many alternative explanations are falsifiable and have been eliminated. I think this is a totally new domain of the human knowledge that does not have yet a name (a label), but it is the closest you can get to science. It is science de jure if not de facto.
 
posted by Anton Constantinescu
 on November 14, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 22, 2006
 
Title: The Archives
 
What is going on here?
 
Even more: Full archives
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 22, 2006
 
You are so right!  If only there were more intellectual diversity on campuses, students could make more informed decisions.  Im sick of professors who try to bully their students into their way of thinking!
 
posted by Steven Greenbladt
 on October 22, 2006 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

====================================================
Date: October 20, 2006
 
Title: I Hate the News
 
Some people start their day by reading The New York Times. Others end it by watching the nightly news. Some get it from The Daily Show. Others download it from a variety weblogs. Some keep up-to-the-minute by following CNN. Others have instant news updates automatically text messaged to their phone. But everybody seems to agree: its a citizens responsibility to keep up with the news. Everybody except me.
 
I think following the news is a waste of time.
 
Some people agree with me on a small scale. Some point out that the cable channels are obsessed with bizarre crimes that have little larger impact, that they worry too much about horse-race coverage of politics, that too much of the news is filled with PR-inserted nonsense. But they do this because they think these are aberrations; that underneath all this, the news is worth saving. I simply go one step further: I think none of it is worthwhile.
 
Let us look at the front page of todays New York Times, the gold standard in news. In the top spot there is a story about Republicans feuding among themselves. There is a photo of soldiers in Iraq. A stock exchange chief must return $100M. There is a concern about some doctors over-selling a nerve testing system. There is a threat from China against North Korea. There is a report that violence in Iraq is rising. And there is concern about virtual science classes replacing real ones.
 
None of these stories have relevance to my life. Reading them may be enjoyable, but its an enjoyable waste of time. They will have no impact on my actions one way or another.
 
Most people will usually generally concede this point, but suggest that theres something virtuous about knowing it anyway, that it makes me a better citizen. They point out that newspapers are a key part of our democracy, that by exposing wrong-doing to the people, they force the wrong-doers to stop.
 
This seems to be true, but the curious thing is that Im never involved. The government commits a crime, the New York Times prints it on the front page, the people on the cable chat shows foam at the mouth about it, the government apologizes and commits the crime more subtly. Its a valuable system  I certainly support the government being more subtle about committing crimes (well, for the sake of argument, at least)  but you notice how it never involves me? It seems like the whole thing would work just as well even if nobody ever read the Times or watched the cable chat shows. Its a closed system.
 
There is voting, of course, but to become an informed voter all one needs to do is read a short guide about the candidates and issues before the election. Theres no need to have to suffer through the daily back-and-forth of allegations and counter-allegations, of scurrilous lies and their refutations. Indeed, reading a voters guide is much better: theres no recency bias (where you only remember the crimes reported in the past couple months), you get to hear both sides of the story after the investigation has died down, you can actually think about the issues instead of worrying about the politics.
 
Others say that sure, most of the stuff in the news isnt of use, but occasionally youll come across some story that will lead you to actually change what youve been working on. But really, how plausible is this? Most peoples major life changes dont come from reading an article in the newspaper; they come from reading longer-form essays or thoughtful books, which are much more convincing and detailed.
 
Which brings me to my second example of people agreeing with me on the small scale. Youll often hear TV critics say that CNNs up-to-the-minute reporting is absurd. Instead of saying, We have unconfirmed reports thatThis just in! We now have confirmed reports that those unconfirmed reports have been denied. No, wait! Theres a new report denying the confirmation of the denial of the unconfirmed report. and giving viewers whiplash, they suggest that the reporters simply wait until a story is confirmed before reporting it and do commentary in the meantime.
 
But if thats true on a scale of minutes, why longer? Instead of watching hourly updates, why not read a daily paper? Instead of reading the back and forth of a daily, why not read a weekly review? Instead of a weekly review, why not read a monthly magazine? Instead of a monthly magazine, why not read an annual book?
 
With the time people waste reading a newspaper every day, they could have read an entire book about most subjects covered and thereby learned about it with far more detail and far more impact than the daily doses they get dribbled out by the paper. But people, of course, wouldnt read a book about most subjects covered in the paper, because most of them are simply irrelevant.
 
But finally, Id like to argue that following the news isnt just a waste of time, its actively unhealthy. Edward Tufte notes that when he used to read the New York Times in the morning, it scrambled his brain with so many different topics that he couldnt get any real intellectual work done the rest of the day.
 
The newss obsession with having a little bit of information on a wide variety of subjects means that it actually gets most of those subjects wrong. (One need only read the blatant errors reported in the corrections page to get some sense of the more thorough-going errors that must lie beneath them. And, indeed, anyone who has ever been in the news will tell you that the news always gets the story wrong.) Its obsession with the criminal and the deviant makes us less trusting people. Its obsession with the hurry of the day-to-day makes us less reflective thinkers. Its obsession with surfaces makes us shallow.
 
This is not simply an essay meant to provoke; I genuinely believe what I write. I have not followed the news at least since I was 13 (with occasional lapses on particular topics). My life does not seem to be impoverished for it; indeed, I think it has been greatly enhanced. But I havent found many other people who are willing to take the plunge.
 
You should follow me on twitter here.
 
October 20, 2006
 
Id distinguish whats relevant from whats interesting. E.g., a local zoning board dispute is more relevant to me than interesting.  Youre still interested in matters that are only marginally relevant to you. Youre just widening your sample as a noise filter, and it just becomes a matter of finding the optimum time period.  So if journalism is the first draft of history, maybe we should wait for the second draft, huh?
 
posted by Mike Sierra
 on October 20, 2006 #
 
This essay is kinda funny considering that Aaron works on a website that is all about sharing democratizing news
 
posted by johnnyboy
 on October 20, 2006 #
 
johnnyboy: Is that what Aarons blog is about? HmmmI thought it was about making fun of people. Thats why I read it, anyway. Though you are right, this one was pretty funny too.
 
posted by ged
 on October 20, 2006 #
 
Wow, this post plays to so many of my own prejudices about the news, I almost want to disqualify myself from commenting! LOL Anyway, I have a challenge Ive posted to friends and strangers over the past 25 years, and I have yet to have a winner.  Here it is: if you, personally (first-hand knowledge only!) have been involved in a situation that was reported in the newspaper, did they get it correct, 100 percent? Every name spelled correctly?  The numbers right? The very simplest of details that would have been easy to check and verify?  Because of the several hundred (admittedly small sample) Ive asked, no one has answered in the affirmative.  From the smallest local story to the national ones.  I just think thats bizarre, and I dont understand it, knowing how obsessive some reporters and writers can be about details.  Any explanations?
 
posted by Reg Aubry
 on October 20, 2006 #
 
Stop reminding me of Theodore Sturgeon short stories dangit! If you havent read And Now The News (the story in the book of the same title) you must go read it now! Go!
 
posted by Jamie McCarthy
 on October 20, 2006 #
 
One morning about 5 years ago, for reasons which I have never fully understood, I clicked on the morning news for the first time ever. The date was 9/11/2001. The result was so bad that I never repeated the experiment.
 
posted by Gordon
 on October 20, 2006 #
 
By the same argument, we probably shouldnt read blogs either, except ones that have time-sensitive, relative information.
 
posted by Brian Slesinsky
 on October 21, 2006 #
 
@Reg Aubry:
 
Consider how unreliable eyewitness testimony is. People who witness crimes often have very different accounts of what happened  not just trivia like whether the assailant was wearing green-on-red plaid or red-on-green plaid, but how many people were involved, the sequence of events, the skin color and other obvious physical characteristics of the people involved, etc.
 
Whats my point? The news is made by people who rely on other people and their memories and explanations of what happened.
 
And that is not even considering the intentional dishonesty of parties involved in the events.
 
posted by joseph knecht
 on October 21, 2006 #
 
actually, nassim taleb (author of Fooled by Randomness, which is an awesome book about luck and financial markets) also talks about information pollution (more in the context of financial commentators on things like CNBC and Bloomberg).
 
posted by B.Z.
 on October 21, 2006 #
 
None of these stories have relevance to my life. 
  Reading them may be enjoyable, but its an 
  enjoyable waste of time. They will have no impact 
  on my actions one way or another.
 
Youre basically arguing against Chomsky and denying the influence of media on public opinion. This is very interesting for several reasons, one would be that youve just found out that spending money in political campaigns is a waste - though somehow this goes against every piece of study done in that field; OK, maybe it is in fact only the bumpersticker and the flag that make difference, not the news-media.
 
But seriously: I think you are arguing, that it doesnt make any sense for YOU to read the news, because you already made up your mind on all the things youre going to do. You know who youre voting for, you know that youll not be taking part in any revolutions toppling the government, you know already what you want to believe about the policies of certain politicians, or parties. In such a case of course it doesnt help to read the news. Neither for you, nor for followers of the Bush cult, or religious nuts etc. (forgive me for juxtaposing you with those groups; I know that unlike them you are from the reality-based community and will change your perceptions in accordance with reality).
 
However the conclusion that it is unnecessary for you, does not mean it is unnecesary for everybody. I agree that watching the news daily is more for entertainment, but I think getting a weekly overview over what is happening is important, for the same reason for not letting all tax-related stuff pile up until shortly before the deadlines; its easier to get done, it feels less like a chore). And yes, due to things I have read in the news, I have actualy taken action, like taking part in demonstrations for/against certain ideas/concepts/policies. Its not like there is a dichotomy between reading long essays/books and reading newspapers. There is in fact a) some overlap and b) plenty of reason to do both, because I do not beforehand what topics I want (or should be) reading long books/essays on.
 
But if thats true on a scale of minutes, why 
  longer? Instead of watching hourly updates, why 
  not read a daily paper? Instead of reading the 
  back and forth of a daily, why not read a weekly
   review? Instead of a weekly review, why not 
  read a monthly magazine? Instead of a monthly 
  magazine, why not read an annual book?
 
Thats a very poor argument, in fact its not an argument its a slippery slope fallacy. And I am surprised that youd stoop so low. Here see how much sense it makes:
If having sex every minute of your life is not a good way to live your life and might lead to harmful side-effects, then why would it be a good idea to have sex once a day? or once a week? Or once a year or once in your life? If having sex every minute in your life is bad, then surely having sex even once in your life is bad as well. Remeber: If the glove doesnt fit, you must acquit.
Doesnt make much sense, does it
 
The newss obsession with having a little bit of
  information on a wide variety of subjects means 
  that it actually gets most of those subjects 
  wrong.
 
This seems similar to one of the commenters saying:
 
that was reported in the newspaper, did they get
  it correct, 100 percent?
 
Its probably true that often things are not 100% correct. Its also true that of the many decision that I face as a human every day not all are 100% correct, yet I somehow manage to get by and even think of my life as being somewhat decent. Could it be that the same goes for newspapers? That while they may not be 100%correct  on any subject, that they manage to be decent enough to be useful for the people readin them? Sure, Id prefer to have an oracle that is 100% correct; but I sure as hell would not pay the price for that with respect to news. You probably know the difference of cost between a datacenter that guarantuees 99% availability, and the one that offers 99,999% availability (the costs explode). For my purposes the former has been decent enough, thank you. As a politician making crucial decision about life or death, you certainl want higher precision, and they do in fact pay a lot more for their reports and intelligence, than what I pay for a newspaper. In any case: Are you honestly suggesting that the simple and obvious fact that a newspaper is not an oracle makes them useless?
 
Its a valuable system  I certainly support 
  the government being more subtle about 
  committing crimes (well, for the sake of 
  argument, at least)  but you notice how it 
  never involves me? It seems like the whole thing
   would work just as well even if nobody ever 
  read the Times or watched the cable chat shows. 
  Its a closed system.
 
You can say the same thing about voting in a represantative democracy. Surely one singe vote is not going to make a difference. And even if only the people voted that actually hold office, and the rest of the population wouldnt, it wouldnt make a difference, would it? Legitimacy, Schmeticimacy, thats not important. After all its only the brand that counts, right? If  somebody bought the Times and never published something to the pubic, and only made their claims to the officials in government, it would keep on working the same way. Much like when dictators claim they live and rule in a democracy and have free press, and freedom for the people, then that makes it true, at least as long as they bought the true democracy brand, like Iraq is currently doing. Certainly it doesnt involve any of the actual people living there to do or say anything.
 
The reason that the closed system works, is because there is some legitimacy in it. That legitimacy is gone when people stop participating in it. For a newspaper participation comes from the readers it is reaching, and for a democracy it is the people voting. Claiming that its a closed system and works the same way when you take away the people is absurd.
 
What you can claim is that taking away one person is not going to make the system collapse. In game theory I believe this is called the free riders dilemma. Surely the country is not going down the drain, when one person is not paying his taxes. Surely public transit is not going bankrupt, if I decide not pay today. etc. etc.
 
Most peoples major life changes dont come from
  reading an article in the newspaper; they come 
  from reading longer-form essays or thoughtful 
  books, which are much more convincing and 
  detailed.
 
What does that say about your weblog?
 
I think what you are really trying to say, is that the act of delivering and the act of absorbing a list of facts about lots of unrelated little stories is not helpful. Thats true for a certain kind of journalism (in quotes) that feeds on the same instinct that makes peope slow down and look at accident-scenes. Thats indeed little helpful. But to reduce news, newspapers or the media to just that is dismissing the reality of the world we live in.
 
posted by Anonymous
 on October 21, 2006 #
 
Reading the news may, and probably does, make you a better citizen. But so what? I dont want to be a (good) citizen, i.e. an (obedient) subject of a state. As the saying goes, the only nation worth paying any allegiance to, is imagination.
 
With regard to the news themselves, I just scan the headlines (RSS) to see whats going on, and it wont waste many minutes of my time a day. Thats usually quite enough to infer the content, most of which is totally uninteresting. Occasionally theres a more interesting story worth reading, but only very occasionally.
 
One could actually almost survive on free newspapers here, as every few months some newspaper tries to lure you to order it, by offering it for free for a month or two. Some years ago I once took the free newspaper, but all I got was fed up with hauling the papers to the paper recycling bin, so I havent accepted any newspaper offers, free or otherwise, since then.
 
posted by tuomov
 on October 21, 2006 #
 
I own a television, but it is literally wrapped up in a wooden box which has a lock on it, and for good reason. I also gave up on the news after a brief stint in the wake of 9-11 when every military anything had a TV tuned to CNN non-stop: having taken news consumption to its limit, and having a job, simultaneously, to find information, it became painfully clear that the news, and television in general, was a waste of time. I rely on friends and blogs to keep me informed of current events and I spend my news time searching out other viewpoints. With those provisios, let me tack on to Anonymous about this:
 
This is true, but it is also true that most scientific findings are false. This is a deep but practical reason that it is necessary to doubt, not to reject journalism.
 
posted by Niels Olson
 on October 21, 2006 #
 
Do you vote?
Are your choices when voting influenced by what you read in the news?
 
If so it is no longer a closed system and you are involved. The reason that the government reacts when the cable channels, etc froth at the mouth is that they are concerned that that votes are at stake. If no one ever read the papers, or watched the news, then the motivation for the goverment to commit crimes more subtly would not exist. It is not a closed system, but it can feel that way, as the actions of voters are only significant when viewed in large blocks.
 
I would agree that following the news on an hourly, or daily basis is a waste of time for the average person, but when the time comes to vote for a representative , knowledge of how they have performed in the past is valuable.
 
posted by Sean O'Donnell
 on October 22, 2006 #
 
Maybe its not reading the Times that helps, but buying it  youre paying the salaries of the reporters that expose politicians doing bad stuff.
 
posted by Chris
 on October 22, 2006 #
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solipsism
 
posted by hmmm
 on October 22, 2006 #
 
johnnyboy: I considered adding a bit about myself in the last paragraph on that topic, but it seemed too self-indulgent.
 
Anonymous: (and Sean) If you comment is only about voting, then all I need to do is read a voter guide shortly before the election. Why do I need to get daily updates on the back and forth? Ive added a paragraph to this effect.
 
A slippery slope argument isnt a fallacy, because sometimes its true. In any event, this isnt a slippery slope argument  its a if you agree theres a line, where do you draw it? argument.
 
Im not saying newspapers are useless; Im saying theyre worse than the alternative.
 
Niels: The scientific findings are false in a very different way than newspapers are false. The scientific findings are false because in experiments you cant rule out random chance. The newspaper findings are
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 22, 2006 #
 
to become an informed voter all one needs to do is read a short guide about the candidates and issues before the election.
Will those of you who believe this PLEASE-STOP-VOTING.
Thanks.
 
posted by DaveA
 on October 22, 2006 #
 
Aaron, when considering a voter guide , then our opinions are much closer. The sad fact is that (over here in Ireland at least) voter guides are few and far between. On top of that where does the voter guide come from? Who compiled it? What are their biases? Now I need a voter guide guide to boot. Its a nice scenario , but impractical.
 
In the abscence of reliable, unbiased guides, the news is my only source of information. That said I agree that keeping up regularly is uneccessary. I use the large variety of news sources to help control the biases. I buy a paper perhaps once every 2 weeks, and watch television news with roughly the same frequency. If I find an issue of particular concern on one of these rare dips into the news stream that might result in a period of more intense attention than normal. If a serious national/european issue arises, It will become impossible to miss. And if something more specialist arises It will do doubt be raised in one of the many blogs on topics of interest that I subscribe.
 
For example when the EUCD started reared its ugly head that resulted in me paying particular attention to all news outlets that might carry any information on the subject at all. And close to key voting dates my attention was indeed hourly. All the better to lobby my MEPs and combat any last minute PR by the opposing side.
 
But at the moment there is nothing particularly alarming happening that I wish to involve myself in, so its been weeks since I have watched TV news or read the papers.
 
I suppose this brings me to a second point. Why are you not involved? Why do you not contact your representatives? I will admit that the first time I did it I did not believe that it would actually accomplish anything, I almost viewed it as a symbolic protest, and with some representatives that was indeed the case. But in the majority of cases I was actually pleasantly suprised that the act of one voter calling, phoning or writing (email seems to be very ineffective) seemed to have a real impact.
 
posted by Sean O'Donnell
 on October 22, 2006 #
 
Hi Aaron,
 
I enjoy your blog, and I love your honesty and disclosure. Really good.
 
Have you considered that because your opportunity-rich young life is at least partly a product of your countrys position in the world, you might have a responsibility to understand the cost externalities of this lifestyle? (In other words, to read good quality international news). Maybe ignorance is blissful self-indulgence?
 
Dont mean to sound patronising, and Im not trying to tell you what to do ;-) but its at least one argument in favour of reading the news, through whatever medium. On the other hand, personal experience suggests that this strategy does not tend to happiness, but hey!
 
Just my 2c.
 
posted by Lee Bryant
 on October 22, 2006 #
 
Im incredibly concerned about the privilege I receive as a beneficiary of US imperialism and the costs to the rest of the world. Thats because I read books; not because I read the paper.
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 22, 2006 #
 
All counts. Books(new and old), papers, tvs, documentaries, movies, what you see on the street. How you talk to your Chinese, Argentinian, and Lebanese friends - Iraqi landlords - or even Jewish contractors - how the 20th century was for their family and people - and how its going - etc.
 
Its harmful to think books are better than newspapers. For local and current issue, local papers and phone directory comes in handy, esp when things are not working that well in the local govts.
 
We all got basic intelligence to grasp how things are working in the world, problem is we havent sorted out the framework to design dashboard for each and all of us - as a driver and passenger - but we have all kind of meters and warning lights piling up almost at random in front of our eyes.
 
But base should be that we all got enough intelligence to grasp whats going on. The rest is like competition snotty kids having in classroom. Get it out. Its a pettiness over the privilege.
 
posted by a.kusaka
 on October 23, 2006 #
 
I know youre concerned and connected in a good way, and wasnt trying to imply otherwise :-)
 
Books are great, but they can only tell you what has happened, not what is about to happen. Also, in my experience, where books use secondary or tertiary sources to reconstruct events, they sometimes get it wrong just like the papers.
 
There are some great reporters out there who are writing great books page by page whilst covering events around the world, and without their primary materials based on sharing the experiences of real people, history books would be a lot more remote from real life.
 
posted by Lee Bryant
 on October 23, 2006 #
 
While i hail your strategy for following the news as a wise choice, i would like to emphasize that it may not be the best strategy for all people at all times.  To say None of these stories have relevance to my life  They will have no impact on my actions one way or another is true (or not) by personal choice and not of necessity.  For the most part i have followed the same strategy as have you; and me thinks it has served me well  obsession with what passes for mainstream news these days is most certainly the waste of time of a obsessive voyeur.  Yet from time to time it is wise to adapt and change the focus of your attention.  If there is a fire in the house, you must watch out.  Me thinks that is actually the case we have in the world today.  The urgent matter, of course, being the Bush Doctrine.  That is a fire that must be extinguished.  Involvement in that political story with the objective of taking control of the US congress away form the administration is an urgent matter with which every right minded citizen of the United States should be concerned  or so me thinks.
 
posted by Seth Russell
 on October 23, 2006 #
 
Sean: So voter guides might be biased, but we can all trust newspapers?
 
I spent a long time contating my representatives; its never had an impact. So I decided to build a system to let lots of people contact their representatives, but then I found that didnt have an impact either. So now Im working on an even bigger system.
 
Lee: Nobody is suggesting people shouldnt do journalism and publish it in books. Nor that books are always right. But when do you care about what is just about to happen?
 
posted by Aaron Swartz
 on October 23, 2006 #
 
Aaron, as I said, I use the large variety of news sources to help control the biases. While this isnt perfect, no source of information (no matter how hard the author may honestly try) is completely free of bias, the only reasonable solution to that is to try and get as many sides of the opinion as possible. For voter guides to become a practical solution to the problem , the number being increased  would have to increase dramatically.
 
posted by Sean O'Donnell
 on October 23, 2006 #
 
Ill offer two counter-points:
 
1) Part of what makes news interesting is also what makes Lost and the Detroit Tigers interesting  its fun to talk about. That is, its conversationally fun to be aware of current events and develop hypotheses on their outcomes.
 
2) The book version of news seems to miss the point. News is a process, a narrative  not a finished complete product. Thats what makes it fun.
 
posted by Rex
 on October 24, 2006 #
 
Part of the Australian Yr 12 HSC English course is Representation of the Truth.
Most of the classwork is sitting around watching news and current affairs shows and discussing how they lied about what they just showed and who is influencing them. After doing that unit of work, we basically learned to question everything about the news anyway.
 
Thankfully, last Monday I finished english forever :P
 
posted by Duck
 on October 24, 2006 #
 
Theres a difference between News, information, and the Media. I have been cut off from the news for a year now since giving up TV. I was never  fond of newspapers, and I was generally tired of what was out there. My half full glass was emptied everytime I started reading or listening. The only thing I may regret about the experience is my inability to compete at Trivia Pursuit in a couple years.
 
posted by Sassy Pants
 on October 26, 2006 #
 
While I cant agree with your proudly apathetic stance, I do think theres a germ of truth to it - especially given the sad, sensationalistic nature of modern news.   As Ben Hecht said 
Trying to determine what is going on in the world by reading newspapers is like trying to tell the time by watching the second hand of a clock.
 
posted by joseph
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
While I cant agree with your proudly apathetic stance, I do think theres a germ of truth to it - especially given the sad, sensationalistic nature of modern news.   As Ben Hecht said 
Trying to determine what is going on in the world by reading newspapers is like trying to tell the time by watching the second hand of a clock.
 
posted by joseph
 on October 27, 2006 #
 
More news, not less. More sources, not less. More choice, not less. More often, not less. Youre either open or closed, dynamic or static, moving or still. Alive or dead.
 
News is not about citizenship, its about survival.
 
posted by Niall
 on October 28, 2006 #
 
Hi Aaron,
 
You asked when do you care about what is just about to happen?
 
Well, sometimes you do. If you retro-analyse attacks on civil liberties or other changes that can impact on our lives, you can probably find a pattern of signals in prior coverage. If you live in Iran, you presumably read the evil empires statements about Iranian nuclear technology very closely, as they could mean the difference between living a normal life and being bombed back to the stone age. There are many more examples I can think of, some too personal to relate here, where a better news radar could have saved peoples lives if they knew when to get out of a particular place or situation.
 
Also, perhaps when you have expended your entrepreneurial energies inventing things and starting companies, you might end up holding stock in the companies that buy your ventures ;-) In that case, you may want to track the news to find out what is about to happen.
 
Anyway - its all RSS these days. Just write an early warning algorithm based on text analysis and get a nabaztag bunny to notify you when to pack your bags and get the hell out of Dodge ;-)
 
posted by Lee Bryant
 on October 28, 2006 #
 
Great article! Ive written something similar a few months ago (in my native, non-english language), was published and got similar responses as you. It seems people defend their daily news habit as if it was sacred. ;)
 
posted by Mark
 on April 17, 2007 #
 
The unexamined life is not worth living.  Examination shows that conventional news isnt worthwhile.  So throw it out.  I dont understand whats the big deal with this, I guess I throw out lots of things like news and it doesnt seem particularly remarkable, it seems quite normal.  Is the point here to produce a diff list of what people who examine their lives do differently from what people who dont examine their lives do?  (Although arguably even people who dont examine their lives probably do examine their lives and are happy with them!)  In any case, that diff list would be a pretty cool list, Id like to see that.
 
posted by Connelly Barnes
 on May 10, 2007 #
 
Miscellaneous list of other things to reject: Mocking the right brain, doing pretty much anything our culture implores such as worshiping individuals, working, acting rationally, pretending to support something and then acting contrarily (for example, people pretend to support community and then buy books, movies, software, etc), pretending that the public is idiotic while contributing nothing other than deploring the publics idiocy and endlessly discussing events which one considers idiotic, leaving no exit from idiocy, acting as a type, dishonesty, quoting or repeating things ad verbatim rather than thinking for oneself, discouraging others from thinking or creating of themselves by being excessively critical and holding all works to the same standard, discouraging others from experimenting even in ways that appear to be stupid.  These are all just based on what Noam Chomsky called the minimal plausible rule of ethics, the rule of the Gospels: do unto others as you would have others do unto you.  Of course one could go further if one was inclined.  And Im not saying that any of these are necessary, theyre just things that I tend to do because I feel uncomfortable when Im excessively hypocritical.
 
posted by Connelly Barnes
 on May 11, 2007 #
 
I agree with everything you said. I hate when all my family can talk about at the dinner table is the shit they read in the newspaper today or heard on CNN. I just want to yell out, Why do you give a shit? How does it effect you? How is it relevant to your life?
 
Earlier this year during the dreadful, nonstop coverage of the rebellions in the middle east, my class was having a long, drawn out discussion on the topic. I couldnt take it anymore so I raised my hand and said, excuse me, but why do you guys care so much about this? how does it effect your lives in any way? If you didnt hear about it on the radio or watch it on TV, you wouldnt even know it was happening, and it would have the same effect on your life: absolutely none whatsoever. Of course, I was attacked by everyone in the classroom and was basically labeled an uncaring, heartless ignoramus.
 
Such is the way of the world
 
posted by gimmedatsammich
 on June 24, 2011 #
 
You can also send comments by email.
 

 

 




